Operational
Wargame
System

ABSTRACT

The Operational Wargame System (OWS) is a board
game series covering contemporary and future
conflict. It is a wargame toolkit that enables wargaming
scenarios in the 2025 to 2035 timeframe. The design
centers on plans and decisions at the high tactical to
operational level of war across all warfighting domains.

Lead Game Designer: Tim Barrick

SERIES RULES VERSION 2.3

December 10, 2024

Point of Contact:
Tim Barrick
Wargaming Director
Brute Krulak Center for Innovation & Future Warfare
Marine Corps University
Quantico, Virginia
Email: timothy.barrick@usmcu.edu

Operational
Wargame System
Series Rules, Version 2.3
Contents

Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 1
Components .......................................................................................................................................... 1
Sequence of Play ................................................................................................................................... 9
Planning Phase .................................................................................................................................... 11
Strategic Movement Phase ................................................................................................................. 12
Tactical Movement Phase ................................................................................................................... 13
IO/Cyber/Space Phase ........................................................................................................................ 21
ISR Phase ............................................................................................................................................. 24
Combat Phase ..................................................................................................................................... 26
Ground Movement & Combat ........................................................................................................ 33
Regeneration Phase ........................................................................................................................ 45
Assessment Phase ........................................................................................................................... 46
Credits & Design Notes ................................................................................................................... 47

Introduction
1.1. The Operational Wargame System (OWS) is
a
board
game
series
covering
contemporary and future conflicts. It is a
wargame toolkit to enable scenarios in the
2022 to 2035 timeframe. The design
centers on plans and decisions at the high
tactical to operational levels of war across
all warfighting domains.

Components
2.1. Colored, Multi-Sided Dice. The core of the
OWS game system is the use of colored
multi-sided dice to reflect scalable
capabilities, lethality, and combat
modifiers. Dice range from four sided (D4)
to twenty sided (D20) dice, including D6,
D8, D10, D12, and D16 with each die
uniquely colored to match counter

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

OVERVIEW

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

When a situation emerges that challenges
subject matter expertise, then determine
the new probabilities for success and roll a
d10 versus that probability. Additionally,
game facilitators may apply “House Rules”
that apply classified considerations or
models into the adjudication process.
2.1.2. Game Map. The game map depicts the
physical terrain where combat operations
take place, as well as inset boxes to depict
relevant off-map regions. The OWS game
system includes multiple map scales to
account for game play at various levels.
When desired, maps can be used in
combination.
2.1.2.1. Operational Map. The hex scale on the
operational map is 200 nm (370 km) per
hex
2.1.2.2. Regional Map. The hex scale on the
regional map is 100 nm per hex.
2.1.2.3. Tactical Map. The hex scale on the
tactical map varies from 10 to 20 km. Some
tactical maps include an additional hex
layer portrayed by yellow hexes that
represent 50 nm (100 km) zones.
2.1.3. Space Capability Dashboard. The Space
Capability Dashboard depicts each side’s
capabilities with respect to Command and
Control
(C2)
Networks;
Position,
Navigation, and Timing (PNT); and Theater
Intelligence,
Surveillance,
and
Reconnaissance (ISR). Each of these three
functional areas is represented by an
abstract satellite constellation that
displays on the dashboard a player side’s
capability in that area. This capability can
be targeted by the opposing side.
2.1.4. Player Hand. Each side maintains a Player
Hand of cards and tokens. This hand is kept
secret from the opposing players.
2.1.5. Attrition Box. The Attrition Box is where
units that are permanently lost are placed.

symbols and to enable rapid player
recognition (black D4, red D6, yellow D8,
green D10, blue D12, purple D16, and
white D20). The greater the number of
sides on the die, the more effective the
capability it models.

2.1.1. Core Adjudication Technique. The OWS
dice system uses a universal adjudication
method to resolve all outcomes. Offensive
and sensing capabilities are indicated using
a die symbol, while defensive capabilities
are represented by a red or gray shield with
a number; and, signature is indicated by a
satellite or radar display symbol.
2.1.1.1. Die Promotion and Demotion. When a
modifier is applied to a capability die, it
causes the die to be “promoted” or
“demoted” depending on the type of
modifier, such as promoting a strike from a
D8 to a D10. Each promotion increases the
die size by one increment, and each
demotion reduces the die size by one
increment.
Multiple modifiers are
cumulative.
Sum all promotion and
demotions together then apply the net
result to determine the modified die.
2.1.1.2. Determining Success. In all cases, a die
roll greater than or equal to the defensive
number is a success (“meet or beat”). A die
roll less than the defense number is a
failure.
2.1.1.3. Critical Hits. If the final attack roll is
double the basic defense number (red
shield), then 2 hits are applied against the
target. If the die roll is 3x or 4x the target’s
defense number then 3 and 4 hits
respectively are applied.
2.1.1.4. Semi-Rigid Adjudication. OWS is a semirigid rule set that does not account for
every possible situation across all domains.
2

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

OVERVIEW

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

2.2. Counters. Counters represent air, sea, and
land military forces. Players use dry-erase
markers on the counters themselves to
record combat hits and associated
capability degradation, as well as the
consumption of missiles.
2.2.1. Signature. A ground, air or naval unit’s
detection signature is indicated by either a
satellite symbol with number or a sensor
symbol with number (sometime referred
to as its stealth capability). Those with
satellite symbols are detectable by theater
ISR. Those with a sensor symbol can only
be detected by a “local” sensor capability.
The signature is the target number for
detection attempts. Detection attempts
must roll equal to or greater than this
number to detect the unit.
2.2.2. Missiles.
Offensive
missiles
are
represented in the game by die symbols
which represent a salvo of missiles. Each
missile salvo typically represents ~8
missiles. A red silhouette is usually placed
next to the die to represent what kind of
targets it can engage – whether air (side
silhouette of an aircraft), naval (side
silhouette of a ship) or ground (a rectangle
intended to represent an airfield runway).
2.2.2.1. Missile Magazine. A unit’s missile
magazine, i.e. the number of missile
salvoes it carries with it, is indicated by the
number of dice represented on the counter
next to a red target silhouette. Shown next
to a missile salvo is a super numeral that
indicates that missile’s range in hexes.
2.2.2.2. Salvo Markers. These markers represent
missile attacks generated in the game and
are used as a player aid to help visualize
complex attacks and to assist in allocating
missile salvoes against multiple targets in a
strike action. They are generated by the
attack dice shown on ground, air, and naval
counters. These missile salvoes are

2.1.6. Regeneration Box. The Regeneration Box
(sometimes referred to as the “Recycle
Bin”) is where players put units lost in
combat with the potential to regenerate,
specifically air and SOF mission counters.
2.1.7. Land Hexes
2.1.7.1. Ports. Anchor symbols represent port
facilities and are used to resupply naval
units, offload and embark ground units,
and as a node to trace line of supply. Some
maps portray ports accompanied by a
shield and white check boxes. The shield is
the defense value that is used when a port
is targeted by a strike and the boxes are the
number of hits it can take. These boxes also
represent the port’s capacity to embark or
disembark ground units. For example, a
port with 4 white boxes has a capacity to
embark/disembark 4 steps of ground units
during a single turn.
2.1.7.2. Airfields. The airfield symbol represents
an airport or airbase and is used to base
aircraft units, launch and support air
missions, conduct embarkation and
debarkation of ground units from air
transport units, and serves as a source of
supply. Airfields include a number that
indicates the number of air units
(squadrons) than can base there. Some
game maps also include check box symbols
that are used to track hits and remaining
capacity.
2.1.8. Deep Sea Hexes. Indicated by the dark
blue shaded sea zones. There is no stacking
limit to the number of naval units that can
operate in a Deep Sea hex.
2.1.9. Littoral Waters Hexes. Indicated by the
light blue shaded sea zones. There is no
stacking limit to the number of naval units
that can operate in a Littoral Waters hex.
ASW detection efforts in Littoral Waters
are demoted due to reverberation and
coastal traffic noise.
3

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

OVERVIEW

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

2.2.2.5. Tracking Missile Resupply. Missile
munitions are tracked during the game and
are dependent on an individual scenario’s
special rules regarding critical munition
resupply. During the Missile Resupply
segment of the Regeneration Phase,
missiles may be resupplied if allowed by
the scenario’s special rules. This is done by
erasing the marks off “consumed” missiles
to show that they have been replenished
and subtracting consumed missiles from
the scenario’s critical munitions inventory.
2.2.2.6. Ammunition Counters. Ammunition
counters are used to help track critical
munition inventories. These are used to
resupply critical munitions for naval vessels
and some ground units, and can be used by
air units conducting strikes –
particularly bombers. ASP
counters can be targeted and
defend with the red shield. If
an ASP counter is successfully
hit, roll a D6 to determine the
number of missile salvoes to
destroy and mark off the
counter.
2.2.2.7. Hypersonic & Ballistic Missiles. Missiles
that fall into the category of hypersonic or
ballistic missiles are indicated by an “H”,
“HGV”, or by an “SRBM”, “MRBM”, or
“IRBM” text note respectively. Such
missiles are immune to intercept by
patrolling fighter aircraft missions. Ballistic
missiles can only be defended by grey
shields with an associated “BMD” notation
on the counter. If no BMD capable air
defenses are present, then ballistic missiles
bypass other grey shields and target a
unit’s red shield. Some BMD capable units
also depict a red down arrow indicating a
more capable system that also demotes
inbound ballistic missile salvos. Hypersonic
missiles are governed by special scenario

“promoted” or “demoted” depending on
applied effects.

Red side Missile Salvo markers
2.2.2.3. Defense Systems. Defensive capabilities
are represented in the game as shields. Red
shields are an enduring defense and grey
shields are consumable.
2.2.2.3.1. The Red Shield – Enduring Defense.
The enduring defense number of a unit is
portrayed as a red shield that is never
consumed. DESIGN NOTE: The red shields
are an abstract representation of armor
protection, point defense systems,
defensive countermeasures such as
jamming and decoys, and vulnerabilities
such as signature.
2.2.2.3.2. The Grey Shield – Consumable
Defense.
Grey
shields
represent
consumable defensive capabilities such as
air defense missiles which add a “first
layer” defense to a unit which must be
defeated before the red shield can be
targeted. If these are marked with a
circular arrow in the top right corner, then
they regenerate at the end of the turn in
the Regeneration & Logistics Phase. As
these are used, they are marked out by a
dry erase marker.
2.2.2.4. Auto-Resupply of Munitions. Dice and
shields noted with a curved arrow symbol
10 indicate the ability to auto-resupply

at the end of the turn in the Regeneration
Phase. Artillery and Rocket units without
that
symbol
track
ammunition
consumption as a critical munition per
special scenario rules.

4

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

OVERVIEW

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

combat. If there are no white boxes, or just
one, then the unit is considered a single
“step.” If there are 2, 3 or 4 white boxes
then it is a 2, 3 or 4 step unit respectively.
Hits sustained in combat are absorbed as
step losses with the white box and
corresponding attack capabilities marked
out by a dry erase marker. When the
damage steps have all been “hit,” the unit
is considered a mission kill (severely
damaged or sunk) and it is removed to
either the Regeneration or Attrition Box.
EXCEPTION: The circular air squadron base
(olive green in color) is a two step counter
with a step loss represented by flipping it
to its reverse side with the flames to
reduce it to a single step. If hit a second
time, then it is eliminated, along with its
associated air mission, to the Attrition Box.
2.2.4. Air Units. Air units are portrayed in the
game using two circular counters for each
squadron. Squadron Base counters (with
an olive drab background) are always
located at airfields and represent the
aircraft currently in maintenance,
readying, etc., as well as the ground
infrastructure and personnel. Air Missions
(represented in national colors or bright
green (support missions)) are linked to
matching squadron base counters and
represent the aircraft performing a
specified mission at any one time over the
course of a turn. Air missions that are lost
in combat can be regenerated, but
squadron base counters (destroyed on the
ground) are lost permanently, along with
their associated air missions. Aircraft
carriers function as the squadron base for
their associated air units. When aircraft
carriers are damaged, the number of air
missions it generates is correspondingly
reduced.

rules as to whether or not they can be
intercepted by various air defense systems.
If undefined, then Hypersonic Glide
Vehicles
(HGVs)
are
considered
indefensible and bypass all grey shields.
Other hypersonic missiles, indicated by an
“H,” can be defended by BMD capable air
defenses.

2.2.2.8. Multi-Role Systems. A capability that
can be used for either attack or defense is
outlined with a white rectangle. Once this
choice is made, both the shield and the
represented attack die are marked
consumed.

EXAMPLE: The US Navy SM-6 missile is
represented in the game with a “7” grey
shield and a blue D12 attack that has a
range of 1 versus air and ship targets (see
DDG Flight IIA above). The “H” shows that
this attack capability is hypersonic. And the
“BMD” indicator means that these SM-6
defensive shields can be used versus
ballistic missile attacks.
2.2.3. Steps & Step Loss. The size of a unit is
indicated by white check boxes referred to
as “steps.” Steps determine how much
combat damage the unit can absorb as well
as informing transportation requirements,
stacking, and hexside limits for ground
5

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

OVERVIEW

2.2.6. Submarines. Submarines are portrayed in
the game using a square counter
representing a single vessel.
SUBMARINE COUNTER FEATURES:
AIR MISSIONS - SQUADRON BASE

Country

Ship Type
Ship Name

Anti-Ship and
Land Attack
Missile Salvos
& Range

Stealth Value
ISR Target #
Enduring
Defense Value

AIR MISSION COUNTER FEATURES:

2.2.7. Ground Units. Ground units are portrayed
in the game using a square counter. For
ground maneuver units, a battalion is 1
step. Most units are portrayed at the
Brigade or Regiment level and are shown
as a 3 “step” unit (3 white boxes). If the
counter does not contain a white box, then
it is assumed to be a single step unit and is
lost when suffering a hit.

Air Mission Counter Name
*Sensor Range
Combat Radius
Attack Range
Attack Value
Defense Value
Country
Mission
*Stealth Capability
CAS
AEW

CAP

STRIKE

AIR ASSAULT

TANKER

ASW

TRANSPORT

GROUND COUNTER FEATURES:
Unit Symbol

2.2.5. Naval Surface Units. Naval surface units
are portrayed in the game using a
rectangular counter. Units are portrayed as
either a single ship or as a task group of two
to five ships.

Unit Name
Mobility Type
Primary Equipment
Enduring
Defense Value

Country

ISR Detection

Hits to Sink
or “Steps”

Enduring
Defense Value

Air Defense
Missiles

Target Type
& Range
Anti-Air and
Anti-Sub
sense & attack (Enduring)

Country
Higher HQ
Ground Combat
Anti-Air capability
(Point Defense)

EXAMPLE: Below shows 1/7 as a battalion
counter and 7th Marines as a 3 step
regimental counter.

NAVAL COUNTER FEATURES:
Ship Type
Ship Name

Anti-Ship (Torpedo)
And Anti-Sub sense & attack
(Enduring)

Anti-Ship and
Land Attack
Missile Salvos

6

2.2.7.1. Headquarters Units. Headquarters units
can generate HQ’s effects. HQ effects are:
(a) Main Effort designation, (b) Reserve
designation,
and
(c)
Information
Operations effects. These can be allocated
to any unit within the HQ’s command
radius which is indicated by the TAC and OP

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

OVERVIEW

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

2.2.7.4. Air Defense Units. Air defense units
have organic radar that enables detection
of air units out to the range of the
counter’s missiles. During combat
sequences, an air defense unit can apply
defensive shields for units within its
defensive umbrella. Or, it may engage
threat aircraft that are in range. Air
defense units may defend or attack each
turn against threat aircraft and missile
salvos for which it has unexpended salvos.
Once it commits to defend or attack, the
shield and die are marked expended. These
are reset at the end of the turn during the
Regeneration Phase, provided munitions
are available.

numbers (“TAC” = Tactical map
50nm/100km hex radius. “OP” =
Operational map 200 nm hex radius). This
support can be used once per turn.

2.2.7.2. SOF Units. Special Operations Force
(SOF) counters represent SOF missions and
are an abstract representation of SOF
capabilities. SOF missions can be used to
conduct strategic reconnaissance (SR) to
enable local ISR detections, perform target
acquisition to promote a missile strike,
conduct a direct action attack, and/or
support a ground attack by a conventional
unit.

2.3. Status Markers. Various markers are
included in the game to indicate the status
of a unit. These include Reception, Staging,
Onward Movement, and Integration
(RSO&I) markers, Suppressed markers, and
TACSIT 1.
2.3.1. RSO&I. Place an RSO&I marker on units
that are embarking or disembarking onto
or from ships or aircraft. Units in an RSO&I
status are demoted in combat and attacks
against those units are promoted. RSOI
Markers are removed at the
end of the turn during the
Regeneration Phase unless
special
scenario
rules
indicate otherwise.
2.3.2. Suppressed. If a unit is
successfully struck by fires it
becomes suppressed and a
suppression marker placed

2.2.7.3. Artillery & Rocket Units. Artillery and
Rocket units have a combat modifier for
Indirect Fire (IDF) that can be applied in the
Ground Combat Phase to promote a
ground unit’s attack, or in the case of the
defender to demote the attacker. Range is
calculated to the hex that is under attack.
Alternatively, an artillery or rocket unit can
“Strike” a targeted ground unit in the Prep
Fire or Defense Fire Phase using the Fires
Effect Table. Artillery units with munitions
expend a salvo (also referred to as fire
mission) each time a Strike or IDF attack
option is used.

7

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

OVERVIEW

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

scenario rules. The following are examples
of weather counters.

on it. See paragraph 10.15.7 for details on
Suppression.
2.3.3. TACSIT1. A TACSIT 1
marker is used to indicate
that a unit is detected and
targetable by strikes.
TACSIT 1 markers are
removed at the end of the turn during the
Regeneration Phase.
DESIGN NOTE: This is an optional counter that
may be omitted in games where units are only
placed face up and visible when in a detected
status. In such games, use of the TACSIT 1
marker may be redundant. However, players
may find it useful on occasion to emphasize a
particular unit’s detection status.

2.3.4. Amphibious & Airborne Assaults. Assault
markers are used to indicate a unit
conducting an airborne or amphibious
assault. Amphibious Assaults are placed on
the board during the Naval Movement
Phase. Airborne Assaults are placed during
the Air Movement Phase. Place the
appropriate marker on the stack with the
assaulting ground unit and its transport in
the targeted hex. The associated ground
combat is not resolved until the Ground
Movement & Combat Phase. The assault
markers are removed at the end of the turn
during the Regeneration Phase. See
paragraph 10.15.8 for more details on
Amphibious, Airborne and Air Assaults.

2.3.5. Weather Markers. Weather markers are
used to indicate the weather conditions
associated with tactical game maps. These
vary by map and region. The specific in
game effects are governed by the weather
charts specific to each map and special
8

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

OVERVIEW

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

Sequence of Play
3.1. Overview. Each turn of the game represents
a 24 hour day unless otherwise specified in
a scenario’s special rules. OWS can be
scalable in turn duration depending on the
purpose of the game. Each player
alternates taking actions through the
Sequence of Play. Some phases are
simultaneous while most phases entail a
back and forth game mechanic with one
side taking an action then game play shifts
to the other side for their action, and so on
until both sides are complete.
3.2. Setup. To begin the game, determine which
optional and advanced rules you will utilize
and identify the associated map and order
of battle for your scenario. To help with
scenario setup, there are Game Books for
most countries represented in the game.
3.3. Phase 1: Planning and Readiness Decisions.
Players conduct planning to determine
what actions they intend to make.
3.4. Phase 2: Strategic Movement. Each side
conducts strategic movement related to
the flow of forces via Rail, Airlift, Sealift,
Road, to include embarkation and
disembarkation. The number of actions a
side can conduct is governed by specific
scenario rules (such as determining the
availability of rail cars). Units that conduct
strategic movement are considered in an
RSO&I status. Security Zones and Partisan
placement (see rule 10.15.10) is also
conducted in this phase.
3.5. Phase 3: Tactical Movement. The initiative
side, determined by the scenario rules, has
the option to either move their forces first
or defer first move to the other side in each
of the Naval, Air, and SOF Employment
Steps.
3.6. Phase 4: Information Environment
Operations & Cyber. Players secretly note

the placement of IO/Cyber effects. Once
both sides have decided on their
placement, all IO tokens and Cyber cards
intended for this Phase adjudication are
placed on the map. Effects are then
adjudicated (i.e. any relevant Cyber
Attacks, Disrupt C2, Assure C2, and
Countermeasure tokens).
3.7. Phase 5: Theater ISR and Local Detections.
Players place their remaining Theater ISR
pawns on the map on the hexes they want
to target. Once the theater ISR capability is
determined for each side, then ISR
outcomes are adjudicated hex by hex for
the whole map.
3.8. Phase 6: Combat. Combat is resolved with
Air Combat occurring first, followed by
Strike Warfare and then Ground Combat.
In this phase, initiative is determined by
either a chit draw sequence or an I-GO-UGO method.
3.9. Phase 7: Regeneration & Logistics. During
the Regeneration & Logistics Phase,
players reset the board for the next turn,
advance the clock on timers, and conduct
repair, resupply, and regeneration.
3.10. Phase 8: Assessment. With the turn
complete, an opportunity may be
presented to discuss wargame insights.

9

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

PHASE

1.

STEP

OVERVIEW

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

OWS Turn Sequence

Version: 2.1
11 Feb 2023

NOTES

Planning & Readiness Decisions

Step 1. Player planning & unit readiness determination
Step 2. Issue orders; Play decision cards
Step 3. Assign reserve & main effort designations

2. Strategic Movement

Step 1. Conduct stratlift, sealift, rail & road movement
Step 2. Generate Security Zones and Partisans (ADV)

3. Tactical
Movement

3.A. Naval Movement

Step 1. Move naval units (Surface & Sub)
Step 2. Initiate amphibious assaults (Place by Beach)

3.B. Air Tasking Order & Air
Movement

Step 1. Determine & place air missions (CAP/OCA/DCA)
Step 2. Prepare strike mission packages (place as stack)
Step 3. Initiate airborne & air assaults (Place on LZ Hex)

3.C. SOF Employment

Step 1. Move SOF units and roll for successful insertion
Step 2. Adjudicate SOF missions

4. IO/Cyber/Space

Step 1. Place IO tokens & cyber attacks (Secret)
Step 2. Adjudicate Cyber Attacks & IO Tokens
Step 3. Adjudicate the space capability dashboard

5. Theater ISR & Local Detections

Step 1. Place & resolve theater ISR
Step 2. Resolve local detections by hex
Step 3. Finalize Strike Plans (Players Prioritize Targets)

6. Combat

6.A. Air Combat
(Simultaneous Effects)

Step 1. Stand Off, Long Range Air-to-Air
Step 2. Stand Off, Long Range SEAD Strikes
Step 3. Long Range Air Defense
Step 4. In-Hex Air-to-Air Combat
Step 5. Transition Air to Tactical Map
Step 6. In-Hex SEAD
Step 7. In-Hex Air Defense Engagements

6.B. Strike Warfare
(Sequential Effects)

Step 1. By initiative, by hex, adjudicate long range Strike
Step 2. Be initiative, by hex, adjudicate local Strikes

6.C. Ground Movement & Combat

Step 1. Decision Cards & Initiative Determination
Step 2. Organize
Step 3. By Action Unit - Ground Movement & Combat
Step 4. Security Force Battles & Partisan Attacks (ADV)

7.A. Check Supply

Check unit supply status

7.B. Reset IO/Cyber Tokens

Remove attacks; Defensive can stay

7.C. Reset Marker Track

Verify theater ISR capability

7.D. Reset Aviation Missions

Return to base; May leave air missions in place

7.E. Advance Timers

Reduce active timers one number

7.F. Remove Status Markers

Remove RSO&I, suppression, main effort, cavitation

7.G. Repair Infrastructure

Roll for port, airfield, rail and radar repair

7.H. Regenerate SOF & Air

Roll for SOF & Air regeneration

7.I. Resupply Missiles

Roll for Arty & AD units or use Tracker; ASP resupply

7.
Regeneration
& Logistics

7.J. Advance Turn Marker & Weather Note upcoming reinforcements; Roll for Weather

8. Assessment

Facilitated assessment

10

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

PLANNING

Planning Phase
4.1. Overview. Player planning can be informal
or formal, written or unwritten depending
on game purpose and objectives. The level
of detail applied to this step is entirely
optional.
4.2. Decision Cards. Some scenarios have
Decision Cards that pertain to critical
scenario related decisions, such as
Strategic Mobilization, OPLAN Activation,
Zapad Exercise, Article 5 Declaration, etc.
These cards inform and adjust the
readiness status of select units and may
drive other game actions or effects. There
is not a requirement to play a Decision Card
in this phase and some Decision Cards can
be played in other phases of the turn.

MOVE __

CJTF-1 CDR Guidance

Provide Commander’s Intent (e.g. Purpose, Method, End State) or Operational Directive for the next 4 days

PIR 1

PIR 2

PIR 3

FFIR 1

FFIR 2

FFIR 3

OBJECTIVES

DECISIONS

COMMANDER’S INTENT

TASKS

PRIORITY TARGETS

4.3. Orders Documentation. If desired, and
dependent on game objectives, players can
be required to write down their plans and
orders via a selected format or medium. To
the right is just one example format that
can be used to document player orders.

11

PRIORITY IW EFFECTS

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

STRATEGIC MOVEMENT

Strategic Movement Phase

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

transported, but they are not required to
start the turn in the same hex as the
ground unit. The ground unit is moved
along with the air transport to the intended
destination. Once moved to the
destination airfield, an RSO&I marker is
stacked on the air transport and ground
unit. They remain in an RSO&I status until
the end of the same turn in which they
were transported. The RSO&I marker
comes off during the Regeneration Phase.
A mechanized or armored unit can only be
transported one step at a time by air and
only by heavy lift aircraft indicated with a
tank symbol. That also requires double the
number of air transports to lift the step. If
the air transport is targeted and destroyed,
then the ground unit is also destroyed. The
destroyed air transport mission is placed in
the Regeneration Box. Contract air can
transport
the
fly-in-echelon
for
prepositioned forces and light infantry.

5.1. Overview. In this phase, players conduct
inter/intra theater air, sea, rail and road
movements. And, if playing with the
optional Security Zone and Partisan rules,
players generate those capabilities during
this turn.
5.1.1. Embarkation, Transportation, & RSO&I
5.1.1.1. RSO&I Marker. When being transported,
ground units are placed in an RSO&I status
by putting the RSO&I marker on the unit.
5.1.1.2. Ship Embarkation and Transportation.
To embark on a ship, a ground unit must
start the turn in a port hex along with the
intended naval transport. A ship can
transport one ground step per infantry
silhouette on its hit boxes. Once underway,
if the naval transport receives a step loss to
any of the boxes marked with a ground unit
symbol, then a step loss is incurred against
the transported ground unit also. When
the ship moves into the destination port,
an RSO&I marker remains on the ship and
unit for one full turn (assuming 1 day
turns).
OFFLOAD EXAMPLE: An LMSR pulls into
port during Turn 2’s Naval Movement
Phase. The ship and ground units are
stacked with an RSO&I marker for the
remainder of that turn and the following
turn and cannot move. During Turn 3’s
Regeneration Phase, the RSO&I marker is
removed. The ground unit and ship are
then free to move normally during Turn 4.

5.1.1.4. Rail Embarkation and Transportation. To
embark on rail transport, a ground unit
must be in a railhead co-located with rail
cars at the beginning of the turn. One rail
car counter can lift one ground unit step.
The unit spends one turn embarking, one
turn in rail transit, and then one turn
offloading (24 hour turns).

5.1.1.5. Road Transport by Heavy Equipment
Transporter (HET). A ground unit can be
transported by HET on a 1:1 ratio of HETs
per step. The unit embarks and moves in
one turn, then spends one full turn
disembarking and in an RSO&I status.

5.1.1.3. Air Embarkation and Transportation. To
embark on an air transport, a ground unit
must start the turn in an airfield hex. An air
transport mission is required for each step
12

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

MOVEMENT

Tactical Movement Phase

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

[Note: Diesel subs are not restricted to
operating within 2 hexes of a friendly port.]

6.1. Overview. In the standard scenario, the
game turn spans a 24 hour time period.
6.2. Moving Through Enemy Units. When a
player attempts to move a naval or air unit
through an enemy unit, the non-moving
player may declare combat / intercept and
halt the unit if it is detected. The combat is
resolved in the Combat Phase.
6.3. Naval Movement. The initiative side
determines whether to move first or defer
first move to the other side. Players move
all desired naval units. Ships move per the
movement table based on type of zone and
ship type.
6.4. Naval Movement Rates. Operational Map:
CVNs
4 hexes
Surface Combatants
3 hexes
Auxiliary Ships
2 hexes
Patrol Craft
2 hexes*
SSN, SSGN, SSBN
3 hexes**
SSK
2 hexes**
*Patrol Craft must remain within 2 hexes of
a friendly port or mother ship
**If subs move max, they are marked with
cavitation
6.4.1. Special Movement Limitations. Some
naval units have special movement
limitations and are marked with brown
shading to indicate a movement restriction
rule.
6.4.1.1. Patrol Craft (PC). PCs are limited to 2 hex
movement and must remain within range
of a friendly port or mother ship. EXAMPLE:
The People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN)
Houbei patrol craft must confine their
movement to operate within 2 hexes of a
Chinese controlled port.
6.4.1.2. Diesel Submarines. Diesel submarines
are indicated with a brown background to
show their lower movement rate
compared to nuclear attack submarines.

6.4.2. Submarine Movement & Sensing. When
conducting normal movement, SSNs,
SSGNs and SSBNs can move 2 hexes (400
nm) and SSK can move 1 hex (200 nm) per
turn
without
cavitating
(6.4.2.2).
Submarines can detect surface platforms in
the same hex but must roll for detection
using their torpedo attack die roll as the
sensing die roll. Submarines attempting to
detect
surface
platforms
remain
undetected unless detected by ASW
missions (6.4.4). If in Silent Running mode
(6.4.2.1), the sensing die roll versus surface
platforms is promoted. If a submarine is
not in Silent Running mode, it cannot make
a detection attempt versus other
submarines unless the target submarine is
cavitating.
6.4.2.1. Silent Running. When a player chooses
to keep a submarine in the same hex and
not move, a Silent Running marker can be
placed on the submarine. Silent Running
results in a demotion for any local
detection attempts against it. Silent
Running is removed when the submarine
initiates an attack or when it moves to
another hex. Silent Running also promotes
local detection attempts and enables a
submarine to roll for a detection attempt
against other submarines.

6.4.2.2. Cavitation. When a player chooses to
move an SSN, SSGN, or SSBN at the flank
speed movement of 3 hexes or an SSK 2
hexes, a cavitation marker is placed on the
13

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

MOVEMENT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

can engage a High Value Unit (HVU) such as
an aircraft carrier that is in the same hex. If
detected and engaged by the ASW Screen,
and the submarine survives, then the
submarine must abort its attack and
disengage. If it remains undetected, then
the submarine can proceed to engage a
HVU target.
6.4.5. Mine Warfare. Mine counters are
provided as an optional capability.
Considering that hexes on the operational
map are 200 nm in scale,
mines applied into a hex do
not
completely
block
movement. Specific details
on mine warfare should be
addressed in special scenario
rules. Play of mines on
tactical maps is better suited
since hexes are 10 to 20 km in width.
6.4.5.1. Sea Mine Emplacement.
Mines either start a
scenario already in place or
are actively laid during the
Naval Movement by ships
that are mine capable. This mine laying
effort is secretly noted off-map. If the
adversary places a detection asset in the
target hex, then a die roll is made to
determine if the mine laying effort is
detected. If detected, mines are made
visible on the map.
6.4.5.2. Mine Strikes. Once a ship enters a
minefield, the minefield counter is placed
on the map and a die roll is made for a
potential mine strike against all ships
entering the hex (assuming a tactical map).
This mine attack is conducted immediately
during the conduct of Naval Movement.
Other ships in the formation are then given
the opportunity to abort movement into
the hex unless the player decides to accept
the risk and subject each ship to a mine
attack. Mine attacks are either D6 or D8

submarine which promotes any detection
rolls against the submarine.
6.4.3. Active EMCON. Ships, ground units, and
aircraft that are actively emitting are
indicated by turning them face up. They
are automatically detected and targetable
when actively emitting (TACSIT 1). This
decision is made for each counter during
the movement phase and is particularly
relevant to air defense units, Airborne
Early Warning (AEW) aircraft, and ships in
Ballistic Missile Defense mode.
6.4.4. Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) Missions.
Players designate naval units
in ASW mode by placing an
ASW marker on top of the
counter. Units in ASW mode
can only move one hex or the ASW marker
is removed and no submarine detections
are possible. During the ISR detection
phase, ships in ASW mode may attempt to
detect submarines in the hex, with that
attempt promoted for each ASW asset in
the hex up to a maximum of a d12. Special
Rules Note: Some situations may warrant
an exception to this limit with an
adjustment up to a d16 ASW detection roll.
However, this should only be in
exceptional circumstances where a
submarine is clearly exposed to a high risk
of detection due to the terrain and a high
concentration of ASW capabilities. This
may be referred to as the “D16 Exception
Clause for High Risk ASW Detections.”
6.4.4.1. ASW Screens. For naval task groups with
at least two separate ASW assets (surface
ships, aircraft, and/or submarines in silent
running) in ASW mission mode, they gain
an “ASW Screen” status. This transitions
the submarine attack sequence from a
simultaneous adjudication to a sequential
adjudication – requiring a submarine to
survive
detection
and
potential
engagement by the ASW Screen before it
14

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

MOVEMENT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

6.5. Air Tasking Order and Air Movement. In this
step, players generate air missions and
place them on the map within movement
constraints. This includes Combat Air
Patrol (CAP), Defensive or Offensive
Counter Air (DCA/OCA), Maritime Patrol
(ASW), Interdiction, Close Air Support
(CAS), Airborne Early Warning (AEW),
Aerial Refueling (e.g. Tanker), Suppression
of Enemy Air Defenses (SEAD), and Strike
missions. Placements must conform to
combat radius and fuel constraint rules.
6.5.1. Making a Strike Package. During this step,
players may build “strike packages” by
combining air missions in multiple modes
such as CAP, Strike, Tanker and SEAD.
Strike and SEAD missions may leverage
their organic attack capability or may be
loaded with a munitions counter. This is
done by loading a fighter or bomber with
munitions and assigning any desired
fighter escorts or tankers as a single “strike
package”. These may be placed in an
airborne holding area in the vicinity of the
player’s originating airfields and do not
have to move to their launch basket until
their strike action is declared in the Strike
Phase. Specific targets or launch points do
not need to be designated at this time.
Players should consider this step the
application of their Aviation Tasking Order
(ATO).
6.5.1.1. Munitions Counters. Munition counters
are used to represent the ordnance
loadout for strike missions. Fighters may
carry up to two strike salvos while bombers
can carry up to six strike salvos
(represented by the round munitions
counter). When a fighter aircraft is used in
a Strike mission, it can use either its organic
attack capability or a munitions counter
but not both.

attacks depending on the mine capabilities
played in the scenario. The attack roll is
made against the ship or submarine’s red
shield number. The Critical Hit rule applies.
6.4.5.3. Mine Sweeping. Ships capable of mine
sweeping make a mine clearance roll
versus the mines during Naval Movement.
The probability of success is dependent on
mine clearance capabilities and should be
addressed in special scenario rules or
matrix adjudication.
6.4.6. Amphibious Assault. There are multiple
ship-to-shore movement methods that can
be conducted to execute an amphibious
assault. Only units with an amphibious
designation can “swim” directly from a
transport to the shore. All other ground
units must have an appropriate means of
transport that delivers them directly
ashore, i.e. a Landing Ship Tank (LST),
Landing Ship Medium (LSM), Landing Craft
Air Cushion (LCAC), or a Floating Causeway.
During the naval movement phase, units
conducting an amphibious assault can be
placed in a beach landing hex under an
Amphibious Assault marker. Both the ships
and amphibious unit are open to attack
during the Combat Phase. If the ship
survives the Strike Phase then the ground
units fight ashore during the Ground
Combat Phase. The marker representing
the amphibious assault remains in play
until the Regeneration Phase and is then
removed if the forces succeeded in gaining
control of the target hex. See paragraph
10.15.8 for more details on Amphibious,
Airborne and Air Assaults.

15

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

Bomber Loadouts:

MOVEMENT
Fighter Loadouts:

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

missions to extend their combat radius.
Larger tanker aircraft, such as KC-135s can
support two air mission counters
simultaneously (indicated by the two black
fighter silhouettes on the counter). Smaller
tanker aircraft, such as the MQ-25 and KC130J, can only support one (with one black
fighter silhouette). The ranges of these
counters vary. Some, like the KC-46, have
an unlimited operating radius indicated by
an “*” while others, like the MQ-25, have a
specified combat radius indicated by the
number in the cluster of grey hexes on the
counter at the 4 o’clock position.

DESIGN NOTE: An ASP counter of six attack
dice corresponds to a bomber strike mission’s
capacity. The six attack dice symbolize a volley
of ~48 missiles, thus a Bomber mission counter
represents an abstraction of 2 or 3 B-1s or B52s, or in the case of China, 6 to 9 H-6s.

6.5.1.2. Air to Air Combat and Attack Missions.
When a fighter in an “attack” mission
(Strike, SEAD, CAS, Interdiction, SUCAP) is
engaged in air-to-air combat, it uses a
demoted die roll from its organic attack
capability. It cannot initiate an air-to-air
action but can defend itself if attacked.
6.5.2. The Fuel Source Rule / Combat Radius. All
air mission counters must stay within their
combat radius of a fuel source. A fuel
source can be a friendly airbase, a tanker
aircraft mission, a FARP, or an aircraft
carrier (if the air mission is carrier capable).
6.5.3. Fighter Maximum Operating Range. The
maximum operating radius of a fighter
mission from its Squadron counter or base
is no more than 3x its combat radius for
Strike Missions or 2x its combat radius for
CAP (DCA or OCA), CAS, and Interdiction.
Such extended range operations require
tanker or FARP support.

6.5.5. Basing. Fixed Wing air units can only
operate from an airbase or an aircraft
carrier (including LHDs and LHAs). Basing
location is indicated by the olive drab
squadron counter associated with that
unit. When operating from an aircraft
carrier, the squadron counter remains offmap. The carrier represents its squadron
support unit and airbase. Each airbase has
a maximum capacity for air units that
cannot be exceeded.
6.5.6. Aircraft Carrier Operations. An aircraft
silhouette inside one of the white step
boxes on a naval counter indicates the
ability to generate an air mission. Aircraft
carriers and amphibious assault ships
generate from 1 to 4 air missions. Support
missions such as Tanker and AEW are NOT
counted against this number, they are
automatically provided on a one-to-one
basis to this air sortie generation number.
When one of these air mission symbols is
crossed out on the ship due to damage
then the unit’s ability to generate aviation
missions is also reduced. A CV, CVN, or

DESIGN NOTE: This constraint is intended to
reflect factors associated with crew day, time on
station, and fuel. Players may choose to extend
this radius as an exception to the rules but should
only do so with a plausible explanation for how
this is accomplished, such as by allocating
additional tanker support.

6.5.4. Tanker Movement and Support.
Refueling Aircraft, or Tankers enable air
16

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

MOVEMENT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

on the counter. For each hex beyond the
one they are in, this sensor roll is demoted
by one die. For example, an E-3 AWACS
rolls a D12 to detect stealth aircraft in the
same hex, a D10 versus stealth aircraft one
hex away, a D8 for aircraft two hexes away,
and a D6 for aircraft three hexes away.

LHA/LHD may only serve as a Fuel Source
for missions operating from that unit.
6.5.7. Stealth Aircraft. Stealth aircraft are those
with low radar signature and are depicted
with a local detection indicator, such as the
F-35A below with its stealth / local
detection value of 8. The highest detection
die roll that can be made against a stealth
aircraft is a d12. When operating in
emissions control (EMCON), the counters
are flipped to their “Unknown” side with
the white silhouette. When in this mode,
they can engage other aircraft in the same
hex but cannot engage into an adjacent
hex unless supported by another sensor
that is actively emitting such as an E-3 or E2D Airborne Early Warning (AEW) aircraft.

6.5.9.1. AEW and Air-to-Air Engagements
[Advanced Rule]. The presence of an AEW
asset in support of air-to-air engagements
promotes attack die rolls for those
engagements where friendly fighter
aircraft are in the sensing range of the AEW
capability. If playing with the “Best Die”
sequencing rule 9.7.2., this promotion
contributes to determining the sequence
of engagements.
6.5.9.2. AEW and Surface Ship Detection. An
AEW aircraft can roll for detection of
surface ships out to a maximum range of 1
hex using the same demoted die roll it
makes for aircraft in that adjacent hex.
6.5.9.3. Cooperative Engagement Capability
(CEC). When an E-2D Hawkeye is within 1
hex of a U.S. surface combatant that is
expending air defense missiles in defense
against a cruise missile attack, the cruise
missiles are demoted twice. For allied
units, only those with a “CEC” designation
on the counter may benefit from this
capability (such as the Japanese Maya class
DDG shown below).

6.5.8. SEAD and Electronic Warfare. SEAD and
EW Aircraft such as the F/A-18G Growler,
F-16J and EC-37B that are Electronic
Warfare capable can be employed in
EW/SEAD mode to enable strikes and
suppress
adversary
air
defense
capabilities. Such aircraft either promote
strikes against the targeted unit (i.e. the
EC-37B example below) or demote surfaceto-air missile attacks against aircraft in the
same hex as the SEAD capability (i.e. the F16J and F-18G).

6.5.9. Airborne Early Warning (AEW) and
Radar. Aircraft equipped with long range
radar are indicated with a radar sensor
symbol and with a mission titled AEW. AEW
missions can detect air and surface units in
their same hex using the die roll indicated
17

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

MOVEMENT

6.5.9.4. Ship Radar. Ships with an anti-air missile
capability have a radar detection range
equivalent to the range of their anti-air
missiles.
EXAMPLE: The Maya DDG’s
Aegis system has a range of
1 hex for air detections as
indicated by the air defense
capability with shield 7 and
range of 1.
6.5.9.5. Ground Radar. Ground
based radars are indicated
by a radar symbol in the “Special” portion
of the counter. Air defense systems have
an inherent radar range equivalent to their
attack range. To activate the radar the
counter is turned face up and is considered
detected and targetable. Radars autodetect all aircraft in range unless the
targeted unit is a stealth aircraft, in which
case a die roll must be made for a local
detection.

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

CAS or Interdiction mode, the fighter
mission counter is placed on the map in the
designated hex with its Strike side face up
and a SUCAP/CAS/Interdiction marker
placed on top of it.
6.5.10.1. CAP/DCA/OCA Missions. Fighters
placed in CAP can engage opposing fighters
and bombers within range. Only fighters
equipped with long range missiles
(denoted on the counter with a super
numeral 1 next to their attack die) can
engage into an adjacent hex provided they
are working in conjunction with a radar
sensor that can detect the target. CAP
missions represent aircraft in a Defensive
Counter Air (DCA) or Offensive Counter Air
(OCA) posture. This distinction is
abstracted to simplify game play and is
reflected in player intentions and decisions
in air engagements. For more precise air
doctrine, players may choose to use the
OCA and DCA markers instead.
6.5.10.2. Strike Missions. Fighters placed in a
STRIKE mission mode can attack opposing
ships, ground units, air bases, ports, etc. In
the Combat Phase, aircraft strikes are
resolved using the rules for naval combat
or the Fires Effects Table when the target is
a ground unit (see Ground Combat).

6.5.9.6. Long Range Fighter Radar. For fighter
aircraft with long range radar, such as the
F-35, players may choose to remain in
EMCON or may activate the radar to search
for threat aircraft and ships in adjacent
hexes. When actively emitting, stealth
characteristics are lost and the aircraft is
made visible to the other side.
6.5.10. Fighter Mission Designation. Fighter
units can perform five possible air
missions. These include (1) Combat Air
Patrol (CAP) – Offensive or Defensive
Counter Air, (2) Surface Combat Air Patrol
(SUCAP), (3) Strike, (4) Close Air Support
(CAS), and (5) Interdiction. When placed in
a CAP or Strike mission, the air mission
counter does not require any additional
markers. However, if placed in a SUCAP,

6.5.10.3. CAS Missions. Fighters placed in a CAS
mission mode are indicated by placing the
CAS mission marker on an aircraft mission
with the STRIKE mode
face up. The effects of a
CAS mission are applied
during the adjudication of
ground combat.
6.5.10.4. Interdiction and SUCAP. Interdiction
and Surface Combat Air Patrols (SUCAP)
are used to disrupt movement – ground
18

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

MOVEMENT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

6.5.12. Air Assaults. During the air movement
phase, air assault capable units that start
the turn in an airfield or LHD/LHA hex with
an air assault capable transport can be
placed in a targeted land hex along with its
transport aircraft. The same number of air
transport counters are required as the
number of steps of the air assault unit.
Both the aircraft and air assault unit are
open to attack by defensive CAPs and air
defense units during the Combat Phase
when that hex is selected for combat
adjudication. If the air unit survives air
combat, then the air unit is returned to
base and the air assaulted ground unit is
considered on the ground. See paragraph
10.15.8 for more details on Amphibious,
Airborne and Air Assaults.

(Interdiction)
or
naval
(SUCAP).
Interdiction missions are placed in a
specific “zone” or “kill box” on the tactical
maps (depicted on most maps by a yellow
or orange hex that spans 100 km). If a
ground or naval unit attempts to move
through an Interdiction or SUCAP mission,
then an attack is conducted. If the ground
or naval unit is suppressed or damaged,
then its movement is halted and effects are
applied. Once that air unit has used its
attack capability, then it is expended and
cannot be used against other units in this
turn.

6.5.11. Airborne Assaults. During the air
movement phase, airborne capable units
that start the turn in an airfield hex can be
placed in a targeted land hex under an
Airborne Assault marker along with its
transport aircraft. The same number of air
transport markers are required as the
number of steps of the airborne unit. An
exception is mechanized airborne units
which require two air transports for each
ground unit step. Both the aircraft and
airborne unit are open to attack by
defensive CAPs and air defense units
during Air Combat when that hex is
selected for combat adjudication. If the
transport survives air combat, then the
transport is returned to base and the
airborne unit is considered on the ground.
See paragraph 10.15.8 for more details on
Amphibious, Airborne and Air Assaults.

6.5.13. Expeditionary Aviation Operations (or,
Agile Combat Employment (ACE))
[Optional Rule]. As determined by special
scenario rules, a side with the capability to
conduct expeditionary aviation operations
may place aviation squadrons in nonairfield hexes, thereby requiring a
detection attempt by adversary forces.
STOVL, rotary wing and tilt rotor units can
operate from any non-mountain, nonforest hex. Fixed wing can operate from
major highways with a plausible section of
road that can serve as a 6000 foot runway.
Use a 7 as a default target number for
detection attempts with theater or local
ISR unless specified otherwise in special
scenario rules. Additionally, place a
Defense +1 marker on those air units to
enhance their defensive capabilities. Given
engineer unit support, a Defense +1 can be
flipped to Fortified +2.
19

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

MOVEMENT

6.6. SOF Employment. Special Operations
mission counters are placed in a targeted
hex during the SOF Employment Step. In
the basic game rules, they do not require a
means of insertion to be identified or
declared, this is assumed. [Note: In
optional advanced rules, players may
impose insertion constraints.] If placed in a
hex that is considered under adversary
control then an immediate roll is made to
determine if the unit was detected upon
insertion. This is rolled with a D8 and the
insertion fails if the result is equal to or
greater than the local detection value of
the SOF unit (usually an 8). This roll may be
promoted or demoted depending on the
context and associated factors (such as the
number of units in the hex, the presence of
opposing SOF, or the surrounding terrain).
Failed missions are placed in the
Regeneration Box.
6.6.1. SOF Missions. See the chart on the
following page for potential SOF
employment missions. This can be
expanded or modified based on player
intentions. SOF missions are adjudicated
once both sides have placed their SOF
missions.
6.6.1.1. SOF Direct Action (DA). When SOF does
a DA attack, it must first pass a local
detection check for compromise (this is in
addition to a detection roll done upon SOF
insertion). A D8 is rolled for detection
(promoted or demoted depending on the
situation). If compromised, the SOF unit’s
attack is unsuccessful and it is removed
from the map and placed in the
Regeneration Box where it can be reactivated at the end of the turn in the
Regeneration Phase. A SOF unit can
conduct DA against ports, airfields, air
units, Headquarters, Air Defense, Artillery,
Missile units, ammunition depots, and
ships located in port. If the SOF unit passes

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

the compromise check, then a die roll is
made using the SOF’s attack capability
versus the defensive capability of the
target. A successful DA attack results in one
step loss to the target. If the defense
number of the target is doubled, then the
attack results in 2 step losses.
6.6.1.2. SOF
Regeneration.
During
the
Regeneration Phase, roll a 1D4 to
determine how many SOF missions are
regenerated. The number rolled equals the
number missions regenerated. For each
SOF mission selected, roll another 1D4 and
place the SOF on the Turn Track that many
turns ahead. If a 1 is rolled, then the SOF
unit can be back in play in the next SOF
Phase. This method must be adjusted if the
turn duration is extended.

20

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

OIE / CYBER / SPACE

IO/Cyber/Space Phase

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

unit or capability. If the targeted unit is
undefended (i.e. no Assured C2 capability
placed in support of it) then roll the Disrupt
C2 attack die versus the targeted unit’s red
shield defense number. If the unit is
defended with an Assured C2 token, then
the die roll must be made against the
Assured C2 defense first. If the Disrupt
attempt equals or exceeds the Assured C2
defense number, then the attacker must
then roll again versus the red shield of the
targeted unit. If the result is equal to or
greater than the red shield number then
the targeted unit’s capabilities are
disrupted. The specific disruption effect
varies by unit type. A HQ unit cannot
generate IO tokens or a Main Effort. Ship,
artillery, rocket, missile, and air defense
units with Disrupted C2 cannot fire.
Aircraft missions are demoted. Space
functions on the Space Dashboard are
demoted. If multiple Disrupt C2 tokens are
placed on the same capability, such as
Theater ISR, then it is demoted multiple
times.
7.2.1.2. Assure C2. This is a defensive capability
intended to protect units from a Disrupt C2
attack. If placed on a unit that is not
attacked by a Disrupt C2 token, then there
is no effect for the turn. If it is placed on a
unit or capability that is under a Disrupt C2
attack, then adjudicate the outcome in the
same way as missile defense. The Assure
C2’s grey shield becomes an
extra layer of defense that
must be defeated before
rolling against the target’s
red shield.
7.2.1.3. SIGINT & EMSO. This is an offensive IO
capability placed on a targeted threat unit
during the IO/Cyber or
Combat Phase to promote
detections
and
attacks
against a targeted unit. All

7.1. Overview. In OWS, Information Operations
(IO), Information Warfare (IW), and
Operations
in
the
Information
Environment Operations (OIE) are used
interchangeably
in
reference
to
information related capabilities. The token
is referred to as the IO Token,
understanding that there are important
doctrinal differences between these terms
across various services and countries. In
the IO/Cyber Phase, players apply effects
using a combination of IO Tokens and
Cyber Cards. Players allocate these effects
and place tokens on the map in either
defensive or offensive modes. IO Tokens
regenerate every turn while Cyber Cards
are one-time effects and are removed from
the game after their use.
7.2. IO Token Placement. Players plan their IO
and Cyber actions and note them secretly
before placing them on the board. These
are placed on the map face down so as not
to indicate to the other
side player intentions.
These tokens are revealed
when needed to support
adjudication.
7.2.1. Information Operations Tokens. IO
Tokens can be applied in the IO/Cyber
Phase in an offensive manner to degrade or
disrupt opponent capabilities. Or, they can
be placed to protect communications or to
disrupt detection. IO tokens can also be
placed in the Combat Phase to support an
attack, such as with the SIGINT/EMSO
token.
7.2.1.1. Disrupt C2. This is an offensive capability
which attempts to disrupt
or
deny
threat
communications
capabilities. This is placed
against a specific threat
21

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

OIE / CYBER / SPACE

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

remains on the map. Any
ground combat into or out of
that hex is demoted twice.
7.4.1. Fallout and Radiation Plume.
For nuclear strikes on tactical
game maps (20km or less per
hex), players determine wind
direction using a 1D6 or real
weather patterns. Place an additional
radiation counter in the downwind hex.
This represents the radiation plume from
nuclear fallout and causes a double
demotion to combat in that hex. This is
removed in the next turn’s Regeneration
Phase.
7.5. Space Capability Dashboard. After IO and
Cyber Cards have been played, then the
game facilitator adjudicates any impacts
on space capabilities by referencing the
Space Capability Dashboard. All Disrupt C2
or Cyber Cards that impact space related
capabilities are adjudicated and their
effects are applied for the remainder of the
game turn.
7.5.1. C2 Satellite Constellation. This number
represents an aggregate of each side’s
overall command and control network
status and determines how many long
range strike actions each side may conduct
during the Combat Phase (determined by
an I-GO-U-GO mechanic or by chit draw).
7.5.2. Position, Navigation, and Timing Satellite
Constellation. This represents each side’s
PNT constellation and can be targeted.
There is a normal mode with no effect and
a disrupted mode which causes a demotion
to all strikes extending beyond one hex.

detection attempts and attacks against the
target unit are promoted. This effect can
be countered with Active & Passive
Countermeasures that cancels out the
effect without need for a die roll.
7.2.1.4. Active & Passive Countermeasures. This
is a defensive IO capability
placed on a unit to enhance
avoidance of detection and
to enhance survivability.
Both detection and strike
rolls against this unit are demoted. This
demotion effect can be canceled with a
SIGINT/EMSO token. In fires related
actions, when targeted with artillery, air
strikes, or missiles, the first step loss is
incurred against this IO token which is then
removed. This absorbing of a hit does not
apply to ground combat.
7.3. Offensive Cyber. Cyber attacks are
represented in the game using Cyber
Cards. Individual scenario rules dictate
how many cyber cards each side has.
Typically, players select three Cyber Cards
at the beginning of the scenario. These do
not get regenerated during the course of
game play. The remaining Cyber Cards are
permanently discarded from the scenario.

7.4. Nuclear Strikes. A Tactical Nuke token is
included in the game. If authorized by the
scenario rules, players have an enduring
Tactical Nuke Strike capability that
immediately destroys the targeted counter
when played. The token is returned to
hand and can be employed in the next
Combat Step. The tactical nuke marker is
flipped over to its radiation side and
22

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

OIE / CYBER / SPACE

7.6. ISR Satellite Constellation. This is
represented by two rows. The top row is
used to define the capability level (i.e.
detection die roll) while the bottom row
determines the number of ISR pawns that
each side can employ. Both can be targeted
by Disrupt C2 and protected by Assured C2.

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

When targeted, the attacking player must
assign the Disrupt C2 effect against either
the capability level (i.e. the ISR die roll
track) or the capacity level (i.e. ISR pawns).
One Disrupt C2 token effect cannot
demote both simultaneously.

23

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

ISR

ISR Phase

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

(usually a value of 7), are automatically
detected on tactical maps when in the
adjacent hex of an adversary unit. If in the
open, and an ISR asset is placed within
range to detect, then they are
automatically detected. If they are in
covered terrain (forest, hills, mountain,
urban) then a die roll is made to determine
detection provided a sensor is in range to
detect. If a light infantry unit is in urban
terrain or forest, then the detection
attempt is demoted.
8.3.3. Low
Signature
Units.
Submarines, Stealth Surface
Vessels, Stealth Fighters, Stealth
Bombers, and Special Operations Forces
(SOF) are considered Low Signature units
and are designated with a Local Detection
symbol that looks like a sensor screen. In
most cases, these units may only be
detected by enemy units with a matching
attack capability.
EXAMPLE: Only surface naval vessels and
ASW aircraft with an anti-submarine attack
value may attempt to detect enemy
submarines. SOF units may attempt
detection of other SOF units.
8.4. Theater Detections. When adjudicating
detections, roll the die equivalent to the
Theater ISR level of the side attempting the
detection and match it against the
indicated value on the targeted unit. If the
roll is equal to or greater than
the number, then the unit is
detected.
8.4.1. TACSIT 1. When a unit is
detected, a TACSIT 1 marker is placed on
the unit to show that it was detected and
can be targeted in combat. Alternatively,
detected counters can be flipped face up
while non-detected remain in a “masked”
face down status on their “Unknown” side.
8.5. Local Detections. Units on the map may
attempt to detect other units with a Local

8.1. Overview. There are two types of ISR and
detection – Theater and Local. Each player
receives a limited number of Theater ISR
pawns which can be employed anywhere
on the map to detect adversary units. All
other detections are made by the units on
the map, which is referred to as local
detection.
8.2. Theater ISR. The number of Theater ISR
pawns each player can employ is identified
on the Space Capability Dashboard. The
quality of that ISR capability is indicated by
a marker on the dice scale on the Space
Dashboard.
8.3. Unit Signature Types and Detection. A
unit’s signature type (High Signature
represented by a satellite symbol with a
number on it or Low Signature represented
by a sensor symbol with a number)
determines what type of detection method
is used to detect it.
8.3.1. Fixed Installations. Units at air bases and
permanent Ammunition Supply Points are
considered fixed units or installations and
thus always detected. The opposing side
may always attack these units without a
preceding detection attempt. While not
represented by a counter, ports and
airfields are also considered fixed
installations, subject to attack without
additional detection effort.
8.3.2. High Signature Units. By default, most
ground, air, and surface naval units are
considered high signature. They are
designated as such with a High Signature
Detection symbol that looks like a satellite.
Naval and air units are automatically
detected by the opposing side when they
occupy the same hex as enemy naval and
air units (unless they are low signature).
8.3.2.1. Ground Unit Detection. Ground units
with the theater detection symbol on them
24

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

ISR

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

attempting to penetrate defensive counter
air patrols or air defenses in order to obtain
a detection of surface targets, first resolve
the detection of the ISR asset by the
defender (in most cases such a platform is
a stealthy drone). If detected, then
immediately resolve the air engagement
by defending assets. If the ISR asset is shot
down, then only those assets which
engaged are considered detected. If it is
not shot down, then it may attempt local
detections per normal rules.
8.6. Adjudicating ISR Detections. When
adjudicating ISR detections, except for
Contested Air ISR Situations, the actual
sequencing does not matter. Below is
provided as a guide:
a. Resolve Contested Air ISR Cases
(This must go first)
b. Resolve all Theater ISR Detections
c. Resolve all ASW Detections
d. Resolve all Submarine Detections
e. Resolve all AEW / Stealth
Detections
f. Resolve all SOF Detections
g. Resolve all UAS Detections
h. Resolve all local detections
i. Resolve all Ground Unit Detections
8.7. Finalize Strike Plans. After all ISR
adjudication, players assess detected
Target Areas of Interest (TAIs) and finalize
their SEAD and Strike Warfare plans,
determining
priorities
and
attack
sequence.

Detection attempt. This represents visual
or sensor detections (such as radars and
sonars). When units with a theater ISR
value are in the same hex as other like
units, then detection is generally
automatic. But, for low signature units, a
detection roll is always required.
8.5.1. SOF Special Reconnaissance (SR). To
replicate SR capabilities, SOF have a die roll
promotion that can be applied in the ISR
Phase to enhance detection against a
specified target, such as an artillery or HQ
unit. This die roll promotion can also be
applied in the Combat Phase to promote
Strikes against the same designated target
if the detection was successful. SOF
mission counters can only apply this
capability against one targeted unit per
turn. When SOF use this capability, a
compromise check is conducted (usually a
d8 roll).
8.5.2. ASW Capability and Local Detection. A red
submarine silhouette on a counter with a
corresponding die indicates the unit can
detect and attack submarines. If the unit is
in ASW mission mode, then it can roll (with
any appropriate modifiers) to attempt a
local detection of a submarine. This same
die is also rolled when attacking an
identified submarine. If there is no
submarine symbol then the unit cannot
detect or attack submarines.
8.5.3. Cooperative Sensing. Multiple units with
similar sensing capabilities can be
combined to increase the probability of
detection. When multiple assets are
working in tandem, rather than rolling
multiple dice, combine them into one
detection roll by promoting the highest
sensor. For ASW operations and when
sensing stealth aircraft, do not promote
the detection roll higher than a D12.
8.5.4. Contested Air ISR Situations. When a
situation emerges where one side is

DESIGN NOTE: This Finalize Strike Plans step in the
turn sequence is particularly important to
ensuring players execute strike actions in a
manner consistent with their plans and not
merely in a reactive manner. Recommend
allocating at least ten to fifteen minutes for each
side to review detections and availability of longrange strikes so they can then adapt and confirm
their strike plans for the turn.

25

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

COMBAT

Combat Phase

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

9.2.1.2. Excess Shields – Layered [Advanced
Rule]. An additional gray shield allocated
by the defender versus an inbound salvo
adds a new defensive layer that an
attacking salvo must penetrate. The
maximum layering is two shields per
inbound missile salvo.
EXAMPLE: If five gray shields are
committed versus three inbound D10
missile salvos, then two of the missile
salvos must roll twice to successfully
penetrate the two grey shields facing them
before they can roll against the enduring
red shield. The missile salvos are not
demoted as they are in the basic “Demote”
rule.
9.3. Rail Guns and High Energy
Lasers (HEL). Rail Gun and
HEL
capabilities
are
represented by either an
increased basic defense
capability (red shield) or by a
gray
shield
that
can
regenerate. Note the DDG(X)
example to the right.
9.4. Fires Versus Ground Units. For strikes
against ground units, the Fires Effects
Table is consulted to determine whether or
not a hit or suppression result is
adjudicated. Terrain and the type of target
may require that multiple hits be scored
before effects can be applied against a
ground unit.
9.4.1. Missiles versus Ground Units [Optional
Rule]. Ground maneuver units (i.e. infantry
and tank brigades) cannot be destroyed by
conventional
cruise,
ballistic
and
hypersonic missiles. They can lose steps
and suffer suppression effects but cannot
lose their last step to such a strike.
9.5. Generating Missile Salvoes. When players
fire missile salvoes, they cross out the
appropriate die symbol with a dry erase
marker to show expenditure. The

9.1. Overview. The Combat Phase is sub-divided
into three major segments: Air Combat,
Strike Warfare, and Ground MovementCombat.
9.2. Layered Air Defense. Gray shield symbols
represent consumable anti-air missiles. An
attack against a unit must first defeat any
gray shields applied to its defense before
engaging the unit’s enduring defense
capability (i.e. its red shield). This defensive
protection can be extended to any unit
inside an air defense unit’s missile range
but can only be applied once per turn per
gray shield. This means that an attack salvo
intercepted by air defense has to succeed
twice to obtain a hit. It must first roll
against any gray defensive shields then, if
successful, roll again against the red shield
of the targeted unit. If that die roll equals
or exceeds the target number then a hit is
adjudicated.
9.2.1. Shot Calculus Decision. For missile salvo
engagements, the attacking player assigns
missile salvos against specific targets. Then
the defending players must declare their
shot calculus decisions prior to the attacker
rolling dice by allocating available grey air
defense shields to defend specific assets.
The defender declares which shields are
defending which targeted units. If matched
on a 1:1 basis to an inbound salvo, then the
missile salvo must defeat the defense value
of the gray shield before it is applied
against the red shield of the targeted unit.
9.2.1.1. Excess Shields – Demote [Basic Rule].
For each additional gray shield allocated by
the defender in excess of an inbound salvo,
an attack die roll is demoted. For example,
if five gray shields are committed versus
three inbound D10 missile salvos, then two
of the salvos are demoted to D8s.

26

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

may either double up on opposing fighters
or may engage other air targets such as the
opposing side’s High Value Airborne Assets
(HVAA) (AEW, Tankers, and Bombers) or
other air missions conducting Strike, CAS,
SEAD or Interdiction missions as long as
they are within range and detected.
9.7.2. Air Platform “Best Die” and the Sequence
of Adjudication [Optional Rule]. As an
optional rule, adjudicate air combat in each
step with the “Best Die” platform rolling
first and applying their effects before
rolling for the next platforms that have
lower die capabilities. This optional rule is
unique to air-to-air combat.
EXAMPLE: During the In-Hex Air-to-Air
Combat step, air units with a d12 attack
capability would fire and apply effects
before those with a d10 or d8, and so on.
9.7.3. Air Combat Sequence. When adjudicating
air combat, do so in the following step
sequence with results adjudicated by step,
but within each step the results are
simultaneous:

appropriate missile salvo marker is then
placed on the map next to the intended
target.
EXAMPLE: A ship with three green D10
symbols can generate three D10 salvo
counters that are allocated against
targeted platforms.

9.6. Applying Damage. A single step unit is
removed from the game board to either
the Regeneration Box or the Attrition Box
when it is hit. When there are multiple hit
boxes, cross off boxes from top to bottom
and right to left. Thus the top right box is
crossed off first, followed by the bottom
right box, then the top box on the next
column, and so on.
9.6.1. Damage to Naval Vessels. Multi-step
ships that sustain damage but are not sunk
suffer a suppression effect that knocks
them out of combat and air operations for
the remainder of the turn in which they are
struck. Strikes from that ship cannot be
generated and an aircraft carrier’s air
missions are sent to the Regeneration Box
where they roll in the Regeneration Phase
to determine if they can be launched in the
next turn with the number of air missions
constrained by the carrier’s remaining
capacity.
9.7. Air Combat Step. The game facilitator
determines the sequence of which hexes
are resolved first for air combat.
9.7.1. Air Combat Sequence and Advantage. In
the Air Combat Phase, when air combat is
initiated, players match up engaged CAP,
OCA, and DCA fighters to determine if one
side has advantage in the number of air
superiority missions in the air battle. For
the side with excess air superiority
missions (CAP, OCA, DCA), those fighters

Step 1. Stand Off Air to Air. Resolve all long
range (1 hex range) air to air missile
engagements.
Step 2. Stand Off SEAD Strikes. Resolve
SEAD strikes with a range of 1 or more
whose range exceeds that of defending air
defense systems. Note: SEAD strikes
against targets that are emitting count as
local strikes regardless of the range. If a
SEAD target is not emitting, strikes against
it consume one long range strike allocation
from the C2 function on the Space
Capability Dashboard (one strike allocation
applies to all SEAD targets in a single
operational map hex).
Step 3. Long Range Air Defense. Resolve
long range (range of 1 or more on
27

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

has a red down arrow on it, then demote
the air defense engagement.

operational map) air defense attacks
versus air units. This includes both
shipborne and ground-based air defense
capabilities.

Step 7. Air Defense Engagements. In the
final round of air combat, surviving air
defense units with unexpended munitions
may engage any aircraft that are in range.

Step 4. In-Hex Air-to-Air Combat. Resolve
all in-hex air-to-air combat. The player with
the greater number of CAP, OCA, and DCA
fighter missions lines up air combat
missions by shooter and target and rolls to
determine results. Then the other player
declares air-to-air targets and rolls. Then
apply the results of both sides’ air-to-air
attacks. For air missions such as CAS, SEAD,
and Interdiction, they may only make
defensive air-to-air die rolls versus the air
mission that is attacking them. Such
defenders have their air-to-air die roll
demoted.

9.7.4. Air Combat Results. When aircraft
mission counters are hit, they are removed
from the map and placed in the
Regeneration Box where they can be
regenerated at the end of the turn in the
Regeneration Phase.
9.7.5. High Density Air Combat – Air
Battleboards. On Tactical Maps, when
used in isolation from a Theater Map, such
as the tactical maps for Norway, the Baltics
and Taiwan, given the density and
complexity of air operations, a Battleboard
is used to streamline the adjudication of air
combat. During the Air Movement Phase,
players place air missions and long range
surface to air capabilities in the
appropriate box on the Air Battleboard.
The center hex on the Battleboard
represents the skies directly above the
main battle area on the tactical map. The
adjacent boxes are used to array stand-off
and support aircraft and air defense
capabilities. Once arrayed, combat is
adjudicated per the air combat sequence in
paragraph 9.7.3.
9.8. Strike Warfare Step. In this step, players
take turns conducting strike actions in a
sequence determined by initiative chit
draw, decision card, or an I-GO-U-GO
method. The number of long-range strike
actions each side can take is determined by
the number on the C2 Constellation on the
Space Capability Dashboard or by special
scenario rules. When a strike action is
taken, a player declares a target hex and
then declares all strikes (both long-range

Step 5. Transition Air to Tactical Map. If a
tactical map is being used, surviving
Interdiction, SEAD, Strike, CAS and
Transport missions that are in the
corresponding hex or Air Battle Board on
the operational map transition to the
tactical map and are allocated to specific
zones (the yellow 50 NM / 100 KM hexes).
Step 6. In-Hex SEAD. Align in-hex SEAD
missions versus air defense targets. If the
SEAD’s strike munitions have standoff (i.e.
can fire with impunity based on an analytic
comparison of the munition’s max
effective range versus the max effective
range of the defending air defense unit’s
sensors and missiles), then resolve the
attack without the aircraft getting
engaged. If the attacker cannot achieve
standoff versus the air defense unit, and
the air defense unit decides to engage
versus the SEAD, then adjudicate the die
rolls simultaneously. If the SEAD mission

28

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

example, if a side’s C2 Constellation is on
the 6 box, then that side may conduct 6
long range strikes.
9.9.3. Sequencing Strikes. Prior to game start,
players determine what method to use to
adjudicate the Strike Sequence. This may
be a simple I-GO-U-GO method. Or, a chit
draw system can be used. In the chit draw
method, place the number of chits into a
cup that corresponds with each side’s C2
capability. Then randomly draw for the
sequence of play. As each chit is drawn,
immediately resolve that player’s declared
strike action. Then draw the next chit to
determine who gets the next action.
Continue until all chits are drawn.
9.9.4. Missile Attacks. A missile strike may NOT
be conducted against targets that have not
been detected.
9.9.4.1. CAPs Intercepting Missiles. When
resolving combat in a hex, if a CAP
(Defensive Counter Air) was un-engaged in
air combat, it may intercept threat missile
and loitering munition salvos. This is
treated as an in-hex air-to-air engagement
with sub-sonic cruise missiles defending
with a 5 shield and super-sonic missiles
with a 7 (Note: Use these default values
unless otherwise specified by markings on
the counter or special scenario or house
rules). A single CAP can engage a single
inbound missile salvo. CAPs cannot
intercept hypersonic or ballistic missile
salvos.
9.9.4.2. Missile Launches and TACSIT 1. Anytime
a ship or ground unit fires a
missile, it is immediately
placed in a TACSIT 1 status
and is considered detected.
9.9.4.3. Submarine Missile Attacks. When a
submarine uses its organic missiles to
strike land or surface targets, any airborne
ASW assets in that same hex may
immediately roll for a local ISR detection of

and local) that will occur in that target hex
by generating munition salvos from any
capability within range and aligning them
against their designated target (i.e.
sourcing from “many” hexes to target
“one” – or the “Many-to-One Strike
Rule.”).
9.9. “One-to-Many” Strike Rule [Optional
Rule]. As an optional rule, players can
alternatively choose to strike many targets
in multiple hexes with fires sourced from a
single hex (i.e. the “One-to-Many Strike
Rule” variation).
EXAMPLE: The US player decides to fire the
Ohio SSGN’s 18 Tomahawk missile salvos
generating 18 salvo markers and allocating
them against up to 18 targets in multiple
hexes. This, and any additional fires
sourced from the same hex, would
constitute a single long range strike action.
9.9.1. Strike Warfare: Long-Range Strikes and
Local Strikes. Players first resolve strikes in
hexes involving long-range strike actions.
When adjudicating these strikes, this
should include those local strikes
associated with the declared target hex.
After all long-range strike actions (and any
associated local strikes) are resolved, then
adjudicate all additional Local Strikes, by
initiative and by hex. “Local” is defined as
confined within a single hex or a plausible
local kill chain not reliant on higher
headquarters coordination represented by
the C2 function on the Space Dashboard.
[Exception:
Naval
surface-to-surface
engagements into an adjacent hex are
considered local strikes.] Local strike
actions are resolved simultaneously with
the defending side able to fire back.
9.9.2. C2 Capability and the Number of Strikes.
The number of long range strikes each side
may execute is constrained by that side’s
corresponding C2 capability as portrayed in
the Space Capability Dashboard. For
29

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

COMBAT

the submarine. This cannot be combined
with other assets. If detected, then the
submarine is turned face up and a TACSIT 1
marker is placed on the submarine. ASW
assets in range may then immediately be
used to attack the submarine. The
submarine missile attack that triggered this
sensing opportunity is adjudicated
regardless of the outcome of this ASW
engagement.
9.9.4.4. Modifiers to Missile Attacks. Consult
the chart on the next page for additional
modifiers that may be applied in missile
engagements.
9.9.5. Submarine Torpedo Attacks. When a
submarine attempts a torpedo attack
against a detected surface ship, it follows
the following sequence:
9.9.5.1. Step 1. Remove Silent Running. If the
sub was in a silent running posture, remove
the silent running status since the sub is
now maneuvering into an attack position.
9.9.5.2. Step 2. Check & Resolve ASW Screen. If
the ASW Screen rule (6.4.4.1.) is in effect,
then resolve ASW detection and its
possible attack. If the sub is detected and
survives then it must abort the attack and
evade. [DESIGN NOTE: The presence of
multiple ASW platforms imposes a
sequential adjudication – ASW Attempt
then Torpedo Attack. If there is only one
ASW asset, then the adjudication has
simultaneous effect. This is the key
distinction of the ASW Screen rule.]
9.9.5.3. Step 3. Check & Resolve Target or
Single ASW. If there was no ASW Screen,
then the effects of ASW and the sub attack
are simultaneous. The single ASW asset
rolls for ASW detection if it is in an active
ASW status. If successful, then it
prosecutes an ASW attack versus the sub.
The effects are resolved as simultaneous to
the submarine’s torpedo attack of Step 4.
Note: This is not a second attempt by the

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

targeted unit if its ASW detection capability
was factored into an ASW Screen.
9.9.5.4. Step 4. Torpedo Attack. The sub rolls
one die for its torpedo capability versus the
red shield of the targeted ship. The critical
hit rule applies. If the die roll equals or
exceeds the red shield number of the
target, then apply the appropriate number
of hits (1 hit if equal to or greater, 2 hits if
the die roll doubles the shield, 3 hits if the
die roll triples the shield…).
9.9.5.5. Step
5.
Submarine
Re-Attack
Opportunity. If the submarine player
scored a hit and wants to either re-attack
the targeted ship or attack another target
in the same hex, then they can declare a
second attack. Play now enters an I-GO-UGO adjudication that is sequential with the
ASW detection going first with a gained die
promotion up to a maximum of d12.
Additionally, any ASW capable platforms in
the hex are considered in an active ASW
status now regardless of their status
previously. If the sub is detected and
survives the ASW attack, then it must abort
and evade. However, as long as the sub
remains undetected and continues to
score hits, it can continue to conduct
attacks with the ASW platforms gaining a
die promotion each time up to a maximum
of d12. The moment a torpedo attack fails,
the submarine must break off the
engagement.
9.9.5.6. SSK Limitations. An SSK may only
initiate a torpedo attack if it starts the
Combat Phase in Silent Running posture.
9.9.6. Strikes versus Ground Units. Strikes
versus ground units are resolved using the
Fires Effects Table on page 32.
9.9.6.1. Air Strike. As part of a declared strike
action, players can incorporate any on-call
strike packages that were formed in the Air
Strike Prep step. Once the air strike is
declared, the player moves the air strike to
30

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

this point in the turn can conduct a Fighter
Sweep in advance of the strike mission
provided they do not violate fuel
constraints. If a defensive CAP is in range of
the air strike as it moves, it may attempt an
intercept provided it has a detection
opportunity (i.e. an active radar in range or
it is in the same hex as the bomber). Any
fighters that survived the air combat round
and are in uncontested airspace may be

a launch point and potential air intercepts
are dynamically resolved. If the air mission
survives intercepts to arrive at its launch
basket then the strike against the targeted
unit is resolved.
9.9.6.2. Air Strikes: Movement and Intercept
Procedure. Air units being used to conduct
a strike trace and show their route to their
weapon launch point. Declared fighter
escorts that have been unengaged up to

31

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

intended target is resolved once the strike
aircraft arrive in their weapon release hex.
9.9.7. Targeting Infrastructure: Ports, Airfields
Railways, Fuel, ASPs. Infrastructure can be
targeted by missile salvos, air strikes and
SOF attacks. The standard defense factor
for an airbase, port, and rail is 3 unless
marked otherwise on the map or a
counter. For each step loss incurred, add
one damage to the infrastructure. For fuel
and Ammunition Supply Points (ASPs), for
each hit, roll 1D6 and reduce the number
of missile salvos or fuel by that amount.
Damage at airfields and ports reduces their
operating capacity. For airfields, this
reduces the number of air missions it can
generate and support with fuel. If the
operating capacity of an airfield or port is
reduced to zero then it is out of action and
cannot perform any actions until repaired.

applied to intercept the strike package –
thereby giving them the opportunity to
engage twice in the same turn. Any
interceptors are applied 1:1 versus
escorting fighters. If interceptors exceed
the number of escort fighters, then the
excess fighters may directly engage the
strike aircraft. Once fighter to fighter
combat is resolved, if the interceptors
overcome the fighter escorts, they may
proceed to engage the strike aircraft. If the
strike aircraft survives this detection and
attack sequence, then movement to the
launch point continues. Movement
through follow on hexes could trigger
another round of air combat as the strike
aircraft seek to penetrate defending
aircraft and air defenses to arrive at a
missile release point. The strike against the

32

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

Ground Movement & Combat

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

unit activation is shifted to the end of the
activation sequence and determined by
random draw for all disrupted or destroyed
HQs.
10.2.5. Decision Cards. Some Decision Cards,
such as Planned Offensive, enable a side to
seize the initiative and dictate the
sequence of some unit activations. If both
sides play the same card, then an opposed
die roll determines whose card goes first.
10.3. Ground Sequence of Play. The ground
sequence of play is the following:

10.1. Overview. During this portion of the turn,
players conduct ground movement and
combat.
10.2. Initiative. Prior to the game start,
determine what method will be used for
ground initiative. There are several
possible approaches:
10.2.1. Ground Initiative By Side. In this method,
one side moves and conducts combat for
all of their ground forces then play shifts to
the other side for their ground movement
and combat.
10.2.2. Ground Initiative using I-GO-U-GO by
Formation. Using this method, players
alternate moving one Div/Corps/Group
Army/Front formation of their choice and
alternate turns until both sides have
actioned all their units.
10.2.3. Ground Initiative using Random Unit
Chit Draw. Place the unit counter for all “in
play” blue and red divisions, corps, and
group armies in a cup and draw to
determine the sequence of unit
activations. Resolve movement and
combat for an “activated” unit then draw
another unit chit. Only counters associated
with the activated unit may be employed
(task organization is determined formally
or informally in the planning phase).
10.2.4. Ground Initiative using Planned Unit
Activation with Random Chit Draw. In this
method, players determine in the Planning
Phase the sequence of unit activations for
their side. This sequence is noted for later
reference in the Ground Step. If their
senior HQ and subordinate HQs remains
undisrupted, then in the Ground Step that
side may activate units in the planned
sequence, one HQ at a time, with the
sequence between sides determined by
random chit draw. If a HQ is either
destroyed or in a disrupted status then its

Ground Phase
1. Decision Cards (All)
2. Organize (All)
2.A. Reserve / Task Org
2.B. HQ Effects (ME & IO)
2.C. Missions (Air & Grnd)
3. Initiative Determination
3. Actioning Unit:
3.A. Conduct Prep Fires
3.B. Consume Fuel Points (Adv.)
3.C. Move & Declare Combat
3.D. Allocate Supporting Fires
3.E. Conduct Defensive Fires
3.F. Resolve Ground Combat
3.G. Exploitation Move
3.H. Exploitation Combat
4. Next Initiative Draw
1. Decision Cards (all sides). Both sides play
Decision Cards pertaining to Ground Force
initiative.
2. Organize (all sides)
2.A. Reserve Designation & Task
Organization. Each side places units in
33

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

Combat Adjudication Table (GCAT).
Calculate odds, net column shifts, and net
promotions and demotions per the GCAT
modifiers and table. Then roll a single die
on the Ground Combat Adjudication Table.
Then apply results.
3.F. Exploitation Move (Reserve Only or
Combat Result). Attacker may commit
units marked Reserve as an Exploitation
Force and conduct movement up to ½
movement points.
3.H. Exploitation Combat. The Exploitation
Force may attack into a hex and may be
supported by available unexpended
supporting fires. Resolve combat normally.
4. Next Initiative Player or Unit. Then play
shifts to the next actioning unit per the
initiative method in use for the game.
--------------------------------------------------------

reserve status as desired and confirms task
organization developed in the Planning
Phase.
2.B. Allocate HQ Effects (Main Effort &
OIE/IO Tokens). Each side places Main
Effort and IO tokens associated with their
ground combat HQs that have not already
been played in the IO Phase.
2.C. Assign Ground Unit Missions (Delay,
Defend). Each side places units in Delay
and Defend missions.
3. Initiative Determination - Actioning
Unit:
3.A. Conduct Prep Fires. Actioning unit
conducts shaping fires with artillery and
assigned air. Air strikes considered under
the direction of tactical ground HQs can be
conducted as local actions during this
impulse. Artillery units that conduct Prep
Fire are marked expended.
3.B. Consume Fuel Points (Advanced Rule).
Players consume fuel associated with unit
moves.
3.C. Move and Declare Combat. Actioning
unit’s forces can move up to full movement
allowance. Units in reserve
status may move ½ movement
points. Place the “Combat”
marker on declared ground
combat actions.
3.D. Allocate Supporting Fires. Artillery
units and available Close Air Support are
assigned to support declared ground
combat. Mark artillery with an IDF Support
marker.
3.E. Conduct Defensive Fires. Defending
units in the zone of action may conduct
defensive artillery missions against fires or
maneuver units. Defender allocates
supporting fires to declared ground
combat actions.
3.F. Resolve Ground Combat. Resolve
declared combat actions in attacker’s
choice of sequence using the Ground

DESIGN NOTE: Turn Duration in Ground War
Scenarios. In basic game rules, the turn duration is
24 hours. For protracted campaign scenarios, a
lengthier turn may better model the ground war.
This is particularly appropriate if an associated
naval fight is limited or non-existent (i.e. the
Russo-Ukraine War). But, the longer the turn
duration, the more it risks improperly modeling
the tempo of a campaign. One approach used with
some success to model the Russo-Ukraine War is
a 1 week turn with an Operational Phase that
spans Strategic and Tactical Movement,
IO/Cyber/Space, Theater ISR, Air Combat and
Strike Warfare. This is then followed by two backto-back 3.5 day Ground Phases to cycle through
ground operations twice before Logistics &
Regeneration.

5. Security Force Battles (Advanced Rule).
Once all regular ground combat and
movement is completed, then resolve rear
area actions. Identify zones where a
Security Force Battle requires adjudication.
Calculate any bonuses for each side and
then conduct the die roll off to determine
who controls the zone.
34

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

EXAMPLE:
HQ PROFICIENCY TABLE
US Div
2
Russian Div/CAA
4
China Grp Army
4
A US division is under attack from an
actioning Russian division. In the Conduct
Defensive Fires impulse, the US division
attempts a reaction move by a brigade and
its supporting artillery and reconnaissance
units (total of 3 counters) that are in a
Reserve posture. On a d6, the US player
rolls a 4, leading to a result of 2 counters
that can reaction move up to half of their
movement allowance. The Reserve status
marker is then removed. In this example, a
roll of 1 or 2 by the US player would result
in a failed reaction attempt.
10.5. Main Effort. During the HQ Effects step
(2.B), each Division and/or Corps level HQ
may designate one Main Effort
(ME)(dictated by special scenario rules).
The ME may be any ground unit associated
with that HQ (maneuver or fires). The ME
designation is considered one of six
“supporting arms” modifiers which
contribute to the net column shifts and
dice promotions/demotions on the GCAT.
10.6. Defense Missions. During the
Missions step (2.C), units which
do not move may be placed in a
Defense mission posture. Units
in Defense receive a +1 to their organic
defense value (red shield). If the unit
moves, the Defense marker is removed
from the map.
10.7. Fortified. Units which start the
Ground Phase already in
Defense and are co-located with
an Engineer unit may upgrade
their position to Fortified (+2 defense)
status (flip the Defense counter). When a
unit moves from under a Fortified marker,
the Fortified marker stays on the map

6. Partisan Attacks (Advanced Rule). For
those zones where Partisan Forces gain
control, play then shifts to resolving
Partisan attacks.
10.4. Reserves. Each HQ unit in the
game may designate in the
Reserve/Task Org Step (2.A),
any number of units to be in
a reserve status.
10.4.1. Reserve Employment. Reserve units may
only move 1/2 of their movement point
allowance (rounding down) during the
normal ground movement (3.C). Reserve
units cannot fight in normal ground
combat (3.F) unless they are the target of
an attack. If attacked, the reserve marker is
removed.
10.4.1.1. Activating Reserve Units.
Reserve units may be activated
(remove reserve marker) in the
owning player’s Exploitation
Move (3.G) to conduct Exploitation
Movement (1/2 of MP allowance) and
Exploitation Combat (3.H).
10.4.1.1.1. Defensive Reaction Move (Optional
Special Rule). During the Conduct
Defensive Fires Impulse, a Defending unit
may roll for a react attempt with reserve
units in the defending unit’s Divisional or
Corps level formation. A HQ proficiency
rating is designated in special scenario
rules that is used to determine success.
This number is on a scale of 1 to 6, with 1
as the best proficiency and 6 as the worst.
The difference between a d6 die roll and
the proficiency number is the number of
reserve units (counters, not steps) that the
defender may move up to half their
movement rate. A HQ under a Disrupt C2
or Suppression status receives a minus 2
modifier on the Reaction die roll attempt.

35

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

The base movement capability for each
mode is as follows:

unless deliberately removed. If a unit
moves into a hex that contains a Fortified
marker, it remains on top of the marker
until the next turn. It may “occupy” the
Fortified position on the next turn provided
it does not move (place the Fortified
marker on top).
10.8. Delay. During the Missions step
(2.C), units may be placed in a
Delay mission posture. Units in a
Delay posture cannot attack.
When units executing a delay mission are
attacked, they cause a die roll demotion to
the attacker on the GCAT, ignore a 1 step
loss result and must retreat 1 hex after
combat if they survive. If 2 or more step
losses are inflicted, then one step loss must
be taken on the delaying unit but
additional step losses are cancelled with
the mandatory retreat.
10.8.1. Recon Units & Delay Missions. Recon
units can opt to transition to a delay
mission during the opposing player’s turn
when attacked but must declare this prior
to combat adjudication.
10.9. Stacking. Ground unit stacking on tactical
maps (20km/10nm Hexes) is constrained
by the following rules:
a. 1 step = a battalion size formation
b. Most brigade & regiment counters
are 3 step units
c. 20km Maps. For 20km maps, up to
9 steps may stack in a hex.
d. 10km Maps. For 10km maps, up to
5 steps may stack in a hex.
e. HQ and SOF do not count against
stacking.
f. Light Infantry units in urban terrain
do not count against stacking
limits.
10.10. Ground Movement. There are four modes
of ground movement in OWS: foot, ski,
wheeled, and tracked. Units with a mix of
capabilities use the least mobile capability.

Wheeled = 15 points
Tracked = 10 points
Foot = 2 points
Ski = 4 points
10.10.1. Counting Movement Points. Units
expend movement points based on the
cost of the terrain. Cost of terrain varies
depending on weather. Players consult the
Movement Chart to determine the cost in
movement points per hex. Units may
always move 1 hex except when the chart
says “NP” (Not Possible). If after moving 1
hex, a unit has insufficient points to pay the
full movement cost of the next hex, then it
must stop movement.
10.10.2. Disorganized
Movement.
Light
infantry units may utilize non-standard
disorganized movement (buses, cars,
trucks) to use the wheeled movement rate
in a turn. When doing so, they end their
move with a Suppressed marker and are
prohibited from attacking. The suppression
marker is removed in the Regeneration
Phase.
10.10.3. Zones of Control. A zone of control
(ZOC) is an area of influence that extends
from a unit into adjacent hexes. On 20km
maps, only motorized or mechanized
formations with 2 or more steps exert a
ZOC. On 10km maps, any battalion size
motorized or mechanized formation exerts
a ZOC, and light infantry formations with at
least 2 battalions stacked exert a ZOC.
10.10.3.1. Movement into a ZOC. When
entering a hex with an adversary ZOC, a
ground unit must stop movement.
10.10.3.2. Bypass Movement. A friendly unit
occupying a hex in an opposing side’s ZOC
enables other units to conduct a bypass
movement thru that hex to an adjacent hex
36

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

succeeds in forcing the enemy from the
hex, then a bridge is placed on the map.
10.11.3. Follow-on Movement. The engineer
unit may leave the bridge in place and
continue movement. An engineer unit
could place multiple bridges in the span of
a turn provided it has the movement points
to do so.
10.12. Engineers & Obstacles. Engineer units
remaining in a hex for the duration of the
ground movement impulse can
emplace an Obstacle counter
in that hex. An obstacle
counter in a hex is a die demotion on the
GCAT. Engineer units are considered one of
six “supporting arms” modifiers which
contribute to the net column shifts and
dice promotions/demotions on the GCAT.
10.13. Combat
Service
Support
(CSS)
[ADVANCED RULES]. For games where
greater sophistication is desired to model
CSS constraints, players may opt to include
fuel and munition consumption as part of
game play.
10.13.1. CSS Units. CSS units are formed at two
echelons – Tactical and Depot level, to
enable stockpiling and distribution of fuel
and munitions. Orders of battle vary on CSS
configurations, so special scenario rules
dictate how tactical and depot level units
are depicted in the game.
10.13.1.1. Tactical CSS Units. Generally, Bn CSS
units are used at the Tactical echelon and
correspond with Brigade, Regiment and
sometimes Division level CSS capabilities.

for a cost of +2 movement points (in
addition to the cost of terrain). If that new
hex is also a ZOC, then the bypassing unit
must stop movement upon entering that
hex.
10.10.3.3. Movement from a ZOC. Units
beginning movement in a ZOC hex, may
move 1 hex to an adjacent ZOC and then
must stop movement unless that hex is
occupied by another friendly unit thereby
enabling bypass movement (10.10.3.2). In
which case, a bypass movement may occur
for +2 movement points. If moving into a
hex without a ZOC (such as executing a
withdrawal), a unit incurs a +2 movement
point cost to dis-engage from the threat
ZOC.
10.11. Engineers & Bridges. Engineer units
count as a single step for stacking, strategic
movement, and hexside limit
purposes. Engineer units with
the bridge symbol on them can
establish a bridge across a
major river. An engineer unit
can establish one bridge per
step. A bridge once placed on
the map can be removed in the
Regeneration Phase to reconstitute the
bridge capability for the engineer unit. Up
to 10 steps may cross an engineer bridge
each turn with a +2 to movement as units
cross the bridge.
10.11.1. Unopposed River Crossing. If the
crossing site (hex) is free of enemy ZOCs,
and an engineer unit moves into the hex,
for +2 movement points, the engineer unit
can place a bridge in that hex.
10.11.2. Opposed Crossing. If the
crossing site (hex) is in an enemy
ZOC, then a River Assault must
be conducted during Ground
Combat. The engineer unit must be part of
the assault stack but does not count
against the hexside limit. If the attack

Fuel Requirements: 1 Day Turns

37

Country

Unit

Fuel Points (FP)

Rus/PRC

Mech/Tank

1 FP / Brigade

NATO

Mech/Mot

1 FP / Brigade

NATO

Hvy Armor

2 FP / Brigade

Any

Helo

1 FP / Squadron

Any

Fighter

2 FP / Squadron

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

10.13.1.2. Depot CSS Units. CSS counters
(determined by order of battle and special
scenario rules) are used to represent the
Depot level CSS echelon.
10.13.2. CSS
Commodities.
Two
CSS
commodities are represented in the game
- Fuel and Munitions. CSS units have the
capacity to store, transport and distribute
these commodities. CSS units are assigned
values for how much fuel and munitions
they can store, transport and distribute.
These capacities are not interchangeable,
meaning, for example, that fuel numbers
cannot be reduced to increase munition
capacity.
10.13.2.1. Fuel Points. Fuel Points are used to
enable tank, mechanized and motorized
ground units and air units to move.
Consumption rates from turn to turn vary
based on turn duration and unit types and
are dictated by special scenario rules. As a
rule of thumb, 1 point of fuel = ~30K gallons
of fuel. For one day turns (i.e. one day of
combat operations), one fuel point enables
1 Russian or Chinese equipped combined
arms brigade (with supporting artillery) to
maneuver; or, a NATO style motorized or
mechanized brigade (such as a Stryker
Brigade Combat Team). 2 fuel points (~60K
gallons of fuel) are required to maneuver a
Heavy Brigade Combat Team. Those fuel
points are consumed regardless of how far
those units move or how many units move.
10.13.2.2. Ground Munition Counters. Antitank guided missiles (ATGMs), artillery, and
rocket munitions can be
represented in the game using
ammunition counters. Each of
these counters represents two
ammunition steps and enables
two fire missions, with the flip
side marked as “Low Ammo”.
Flip the counter when it is used
to enable a fire mission. A “Low Ammo”

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

counter is removed when flipped. Each of
these counters represents the combat load
for a battalion for one to three days of
combat (approximately 700 to 1000
rounds per artillery step, 25 to 100 rockets
per rocket step, 5 missiles per ATACMs
salvo, and 50 to 100 ATGMs per ATGM
salvo).
10.13.2.3. CSS Commodity Placement. Fuel
points and Ground Munitions are generally
stacked with CSS units, though they can
also be placed as an independent fuel
dump or ammunition supply point by
themselves or co-located with an airfield or
port.
10.13.2.4. CSS Consumption & Distribution.
CSS units inherently distribute fuel and
munitions to units within their distribution
radius,
enabling
consumption
of
commodities stacked with the CSS unit
during the Movement impulse to pay for
fuel consumption costs and during artillery
adjudication to pay for fire missions.
Tactical echelon CSS units are replenished
from Depot level units during the Logistics
& Regeneration Phase. The distribution
radius of CSS units (both tactical and
depot) varies by special scenario rules due
to national level characteristics in order of
battle and doctrine.
10.14. Action Points & Orders. [ADVANCED
RULES] Action points are an abstract
representation of command & control,
leadership, and morale which translate
into operational tempo. The number of
Action Points a side has determines the
number of “Orders” it can issue to activate
ground units during the Ground Phase.
Only those units tagged with “Orders” or
“Reserve” can conduct movement and
combat actions in the Ground Phase. If
playing with two Ground Phases in a
protracted turn, then players may opt to
enable all units to move in the first Ground
38

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

deliberately planned and allowed by
special scenario rules, when a Division or
Corps level HQ is in play, their Main Effort
designation can be used to enable a
Division or Corps Bombardment action as a
Prep Fire that can mass up to 4 artillery or
rocket units in a single Prep Fire strike.
10.15.4. Fires Effects Table. Resolve all Prep
and Defensive Fires using the Fires Effects
Table. The number of hits required to
achieve suppressive or destructive effects
varies based on terrain and target type (as
indicated on the Table).
10.15.4.1. Precision Guided Munitions (PGMs).
Air delivered PGMs may receive a
promotion to their die rolls for certain
terrain and unit types indicated on the
Fires Effects Table. This PGM
modifier is only applicable to
air missions with the munitions
counter shown to the right and
to attack helicopters.
10.15.5. Fire Missions. For artillery units, each
attack die represents a fire mission that
can be employed in Prep Fire, Defensive
Fire, or as Indirect Fire Support (IDF SPT)
during the Ground Combat impulse. To
simplify bookkeeping, a player must
employ fire missions from one counter all
at once and then mark it “Expended”.
Special scenario rules may enable
players to employ fire missions
from one counter in any of the
listed steps but must then keep
track as a unit cannot expend a fire
mission more than once per turn.
An option to aid in tracking is to
place the IDF SPT marker on artillery units
as they are allocated in each step to
indicate commitment and then place an
“Expended” marker once adjudicated.
Alternatively, players can mark off missions
with a black dry erase marker as they are
expended.

Phase and then constrain the second
Ground Phase by action points.
10.14.1. Sourcing Action Points. Each side
receives a designated number of Action
Points determined by special scenario
rules. These action points may vary by side
or by formation.
10.14.2. Action Point Allocation & Orders. In
the Planning Phase, each side places
Orders markers on the HQ or unit counters
that are planned for action in
this turn. If playing double
blind then these are either
secretly written down or are
kept invisible in Vassal. Each
side can issue the number of
orders equivalent to its
available Action Points, plus 2 free “feint”
orders if playing in a head-to-head tabletop
mode where counters are visible.
10.15. Ground Combat.
10.15.1. Hexside Limitations. No more than 3
steps may attack across a single hexside
into an adjacent hex. But, multi-axis
attacks from multiple adjacent hexes are
possible.
10.15.2. Fires. The actioning player may
conduct fires directly associated with the
actioning HQ’s battlespace and mission in
the Prep Fire, Defensive Fire and Ground
Combat impulses. Fires must be declared
and allocated by hex prior to adjudication.
10.15.3. Fires & Span of Control. Unless
dictated otherwise by special scenario
rules, a single fires
adjudication (i.e. one action
within Prep Fire, Defensive
Fire, or Ground Combat) is
limited to employing 2
artillery or rocket battalions,
or 1 Brigade Artillery Group
(BAG).
10.15.3.1. Division or Corps
Bombardment
(Optional).
When
39

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

10.15.8. Amphibious, Airborne and Air
Assaults. When an Amphibious or Airborne
Assault force receives the initiative, during
Ground
Movement
surviving
amphibious ships land the landing
force into the target “beach head”
hex, surviving air transports drop
airborne forces into the targeted
airborne drop zone hex, and
helicopter or tilt-rotor units land
air assault forces.
10.15.8.1. Unopposed Landing. If the beach
head, drop zone or landing zone does not
contain enemy units then the landing force
may be placed into the hex (regardless of
ZOCs). Units may then attack into an
adjacent hex. Mechanized forces
only may advance from their landing
zone or beach head one additional
hex in any direction and then attack
an adjacent enemy unit provided their
initial landing area was not in a ZOC. Up to
12 steps of ground units may land in the
beach head, drop zone, landing zone in an
unopposed amphibious, airborne and/or
air assault in a single turn and then
advance in any un-opposed direction, but
only mechanized forces can attack from
that adjacent hex that turn.
10.15.8.2. Combined Assault. In a combined
amphibious, airborne and air assault
on the same hex, an attacker may
employ up to 6 steps in an assault wave
from the sea and up to 6 steps in an assault
wave from the air (combined between
airborne and air assault).
10.15.8.3. Opposed Landing. If the beach head,
drop zone or landing zone contains enemy
units then the landing force assaults the
hex. The landing force may assault with up
to 6 steps in the assault wave from the air
and up to 6 steps from the sea. If the initial
assault is inconclusive then a second round
of combat is immediately conducted.

10.15.6. Indirect Fire Support & Close
Air Support. Missions allocated as
IDF SPT or CAS are considered
“supporting arms” modifiers which
contribute to the net column shifts
and dice promotions/demotions on the
GCAT.
10.15.7. Suppression. As a result of
fires, targeted units may become
suppressed with a Suppressed
marker placed on them. A
suppressed unit can only move one hex. A
suppressed maneuver unit is factored into
the GCAT modifiers. A suppressed artillery
unit cannot conduct IDF Support but may
fire in Prep Fire or Defensive Fire at a
demoted state for the remainder of this
turn. A suppressed HQ unit has any HQ
Effects (Main Effort, IO/OIE markers)
immediately removed from the map. A
suppressed air defense unit cannot apply
defensive shields to intercept missile
salvos but may offensively engage aircraft
within range with a single demotion
applied. A suppressed unit does not exert a
ZOC or count towards a step determination
on ZOC capability. Suppression counters
are removed during the Regeneration
Phase.
DESIGN NOTE: Using “Suppressed” terminology
was an early game design decision that
unfortunately conveys a very tactical and short
duration effect. In hindsight, a “Disrupted” effect
better conveys the intended impact on the
affected unit (i.e. casualty impacts and the longerterm disruption in tempo and command & control
due to combat action). Additionally, if a longer
duration than 24 hours is used for a turn, then the
“one hex” movement rule for suppressed units
becomes implausible and a limited movement
point expenditure is more appropriate. These are
house rule considerations that should be
identified when the decision is made to execute a
longer turn.

40

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

each side and then round down for ratio
determination.
10.15.9.1.2. Supporting Arms Calculation. Next,
the number of contributing supporting
arms factors is calculated to determine a
sum total supporting arms modifier for the
defender and for the attacker. The
threshold is 2+ to meet the first column
shift modifier, 4+ to gain an attacker die
promotion, and 6+ for another column
shift. These result in independent
modifiers being applied which result in a
net column shift and die promotion for
supporting arms factors. Supporting arms
factors include:
Artillery (each die)
Close Air Support (each air mission)
Naval Gunfire Support (each ship)
Engineer or SOF Unit (each)
SIGINT/EMSO/Disrupt C2 (each)
Main Effort
10.15.9.1.3. Quality Comparison. The attacker
and defender’s lead units are compared to
determine which side has a quality
advantage. To gain a quality advantage, a
side must score 3+ advantage points. A
dice value comparison between three
steps from each side is used to determine
advantage points. Best dice are compared
against best dice. If the difference is
greater, then 1 point is scored for each
comparison. If a side cannot generate
sufficient steps for comparison then the
other side scores that as an advantage
point.
Example 1:

Additional reserve steps may be
committed to the assault to bring the total
up to 6 steps from the sea and 6 from the
air. If this second wave fails to dislodge the
defender, then both sides are left stacked
in the hex.
10.15.8.4. Artillery Units and Amphibious &
Airborne Assault. Artillery units landing in
the assault waves for amphibious and
airborne assaults cannot contribute to
combat. IDF SPT may be provided by
surface combatants and CAS by aircraft
that are in direct support of the assault.
10.15.9. Ground Combat Adjudication. Ground
combat is adjudicated using the Ground
Combat Adjudication Table (GCAT). First,
the odds are calculated based on the total
number of attacking steps (from all
hexsides) versus the total number of
defending steps. Round fractions down.
Then, the attacker and defender declare
lead units for the basis of quality
comparison,
base
attack
die
determination, and defensive shield
determination. The modifiers on the GCAT
are consulted to determine the net column
shift and die promotion/demotion. Then a
single die is rolled relative to the
defender’s shield value and the results of
the chart consulted to determine the
outcome of ground combat. Then the
results are applied.
10.15.9.1. Lead Unit. The lead unit for an attack
is chosen by the attacking player unless
one is a Main Effort unit in which case that
unit is the lead unit. For the defender, the
strongest defending unit (highest red
shield) is the lead unit used to determine
combat results.
10.15.9.1.1. Odds Calculation. For odds
calculations, add up the combat arms
battalion maneuver steps (i.e. mech,
armor, infantry) involved in the combat on

The 1ABCT is the attacker and the 12th Tank
Regiment is the defender. Comparing dice
values across all 3 dice, 1ABCT scores an
advantage of 3 (1 points for the d12 vs d8,
41

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

and 1 point each for the d12 vs d10 values).
Thus, on the GCAT, the 1ABCT gains the
Attacker Quality Advantage (3+) die
promotion modifier.
Example 2:

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

advantage in combat, whether attacking or
defending. DESIGN NOTE: This is arguably
the simplest approach. And, based on
Russian combat performance in Ukraine
could be the best way to represent
Ukrainian or NATO quality by giving them
the quality bonus in all combat
engagements versus Russian units.
10.15.9.1.5. Determining Net Modifiers &
Combat Results. Once the Supporting
Arms and Quality advantages are
identified, then consult the Column Shift
modifiers on the GCAT to determine the
net shift left or right from the base Odds
column. Then consult the die demotion
and promotion modifiers to determine the
net impact to the base die roll of the
attacker’s lead unit. Then roll that die on
the identified odds column and compare
the die roll to the defender’s shield to
determine which row contains the combat
outcome.

In this example, the 12th Tank Regiment is
attacking the 1st Battalion of the 36th Naval
Infantry Brigade. A d10 is compared to the
Ukrainian d8 scoring the Russians a 1 point
quality advantage. And, since there are no
other steps to compare, the Russians score
2 more points giving them 3 points of
advantage and the resulting quality
modifier on the GCAT.
10.15.9.1.4. The Alternative Quality Advantage
Rule. Another option is to simplify this
comparison to a special scenario rule
whereby one side always gets the quality

42

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

10.15.9.1.6. Applying Results. The following are
possible combat results on the GCAT:
A#: The attacker applies the corresponding
number of step losses.
D#:
The
defender
applies
the
corresponding number of step losses.
R#: An R# result after a step loss indicates
a forced retreat that the side losing the
steps must also apply.
EXP: An EXP result gives the attacking units
the opportunity to execute an Exploitation
Phase movement and combat.
Cancelling a Retreat. A unit can cancel a
retreat by losing an additional step.
Cancelling a Step Loss. The first step loss is
always applied unless a unit is in a Delay
mission posture. Additional step losses can
be applied to a Retreat result instead.
Fortified Units. A fortified unit can ignore
an R1 result.
10.15.10. Rear Area & Partisan Strategies
(OPTIONAL ADVANCED RULE). For those
scenarios when rear area operations and
partisan or resistance activities are played
to reflect the type of conflict in the
scenario, players may choose to leverage
the Security Zone and Partisan or Diversant
Decision Cards and associated counters.
10.15.10.1. Security Zones. In
the Strategic Movement
Phase, Security Zones are
established by removing
from the board 3 steps of
ground combat units and placing them on
the Security Zone card (off map). Then
place a Security Zone marker (visible) in the
yellow hex “zone” of choice. This marker
provides security within that zone (100km
width).
10.15.10.2. Partisans & Diversant. In the
Strategic Movement Phase,
Partisans or “Diversant” (for
red forces) are activated in
a similar manner but

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

secretly placed on board in a zone of
choice. Table top games note this on paper
while keeping counters off the map until
the Security Force Battles step. In games
using Vassal, the counters are made
invisible.
10.15.10.3. Battle for Control. In the Security
Force Battles step, make all Partisans
visible on board. For those zones where
Partisans or Diversant are active without a
Security Zone, immediately flip the counter
to the “DISRUPTED” side and apply effects.
Where both Partisans and a Security Zone
are active, resolve a battle for control. Each
side rolls a D10 modified by a +1 for any
supporting SOF or ATGM units. And, for the
Security Zone, add another +1 for any
attack helicopters and light, motorized or
mech infantry in direct support (must be
placed on SZ marker). Both sides may
promote using SIGINT EMSO and if any
additional Partisan or Security Zone
markers are present in hex. If the Security
Forces roll a 14 or higher (after modifiers)
AND double the Partisans die roll, then the
Partisan counter is destroyed along with
the 3 steps placed on the Partisan Strategy
card and any SOF and ATGMs stacked with
the Partisans.
10.15.10.4. Partisan Attacks. If
the Partisans gain an equal
or higher roll, then the
Partisans counter is flipped
and Disrupted effects are
applied. This counter remains face up until
the next turn’s Security Force Battle. All
threat movement is +2 MP per hex through
the zone, supply cannot be traced through
the zone, and the Partisans may conduct
one attack on a unit of choice. That target
assumes a defense of 3 even if it has a
higher or lower organic defense. If target is
in same hex as another combat unit, then
defense is raised to a 4. Partisans roll 3D4.
43

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GROUND MOVEMENT & COMBAT

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

counter. In the Security Force Battle step,
this ATGM may be used to attack any
combat unit in zone in an unmodified D12
vs the defense of the unit.
The defending unit returns
fire with a demoted die roll.
Effects are adjudicated
simultaneously.

If 3 hits, then adjudicate a step loss.
Otherwise, target is Suppressed and
remains so through the next turn.
10.15.10.5. Advanced ATGMs & Partisans. For
any ATGM units contributed to a Partisan
line of effort, rather than placing it on the
Partisan decision card, place the ATGM
unit on the map stacked with a Partisan

44

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

REGENERATION

Regeneration Phase

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

were one time play capabilities are
discarded from play. For those Cyber
attacks that require a recovery die roll, roll
for recovery per the instructions on the
cyber card.
11.3. Reset the Space Dashboard. On the Space
Dashboard
reset
the
satellite
constellations to their default value unless
a cyber effect is still in play or permanent
damage has been adjudicated.
11.4. Reset Aviation Missions. Each player
returns aviation missions to their airfields
and aircraft carriers. Players may opt to
leave CAP, OCA, DCA, Interdiction, SUCAP
and CAS missions and supporting tankers in
place to expedite game play.
11.5. Advance Timers. For units that are on a
readiness
countdown
or
RSO&I
countdown, advance the timer to the next
lower number. If zero, then remove the
timer.
11.6. Remove Status Markers. Each player
removes their RSO&I, Suppression
markers, Airborne and Amphibious Assault
markers as appropriate.
11.6.1. Repair Infrastructure: Ports, Airfields
and Rail. Each player rolls to repair ports,
airfields and rail as needed. A roll of a 1 on
a six-sided die (D6) repairs a step loss. If an
Engineer unit is present, a single step
repair can be gained with a roll of a 1, 2 or
3 on a D6.
11.7. Regenerate SOF and Air Missions. Each
player rolls to regenerate the number of
missions from the Regeneration Box that
are available. These die rolls are
determined by special scenario rule based
on a probability die roll applied to each
counter in the Regeneration Box.
EXAMPLE: A possible scenario rule could be
that US air missions regenerate on a 50% (6
or better on a d10) probability while PRC
air missions regenerate on a 40% (7 or
better on a d10) probability.

11.1. Check Supply. Supply is
checked at the beginning of
the Regeneration Phase and
effects last through the
following turn. To be
considered in normal supply, ground
combat units must be within 2 zones (the
large yellow hexes on the tactical map) and
an uninterrupted line of supply to their
supply source. In most scenarios, the
supply source is the CSS unit associated
with that ground unit. If the 2 zones are
questionable, then trace supply using 15
wheeled movement points between the
combat unit and the supply source.
11.1.1. Uninterrupted Line of Supply. An
uninterrupted line of supply is a line of
hexes between the combat unit and the
supply source that is free of enemy ZOCs.
11.1.2. Extended Supply. If a combat
unit can trace an uninterrupted
line of supply to its supply
source but that line extends
beyond 2 zones, then it is considered in a
Low Supply status on the GCAT resulting in
a column shift.
11.1.3. Out of Supply. If a combat unit
cannot trace an uninterrupted
supply line to a supply source
then it is considered Out of
Supply. An out of supply unit can only
move up to half its movement point
allowance. And in combat, it incurs a 2
columns shift adjustment on the GCAT.
11.2. Remove IO/Cyber. Each player removes
their offensive IO/Cyber effects from the
map unless the cyber effect is enduring.
Defensive tokens (i.e. Assured C2 and
Active/Passive Countermeasures) may
remain on the map in play as they may
come into effect during the next turn’s
movement phase. Any Cyber attacks that
45

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

REGENERATION

11.8. Reset Fires and Air Defense Units. Special
scenario rules dictate whether or not
artillery and air defense units are
resupplied each turn. In the absence of
special rules, those units with a curved
arrow on the attack die are reset while
those without remain expended until
resupplied with salvos from an ASP marker.
11.9. Resupply Missiles. Each player may
resupply critical munitions provided the
units are co-located with an appropriate
ASP. A ship can be resupplied when in a
port using one of that port’s actions
towards resupply. (Note: Special scenario
rules may limit or designate which ports
enable resupply).
11.10. Advance the Turn Marker. Finally,
advance the Turn Marker on the Turn
Track.

Assessment Phase
12.1. This Phase is optional and provides an
opportunity for an instructor or game
facilitator to discuss with players any key
insights or learning points that emerged
during the game turn.

46

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

Operational Wargame System
Series Rules

GAME DESIGN

Version 2.3 – 10 Dec 2024

Credits & Design Notes
The Operational Wargame System Game 001: Assassin’s Mace: War in the Pacific, Game 002: Griffin’s
Mace: War in Europe, and Game 003: Ukraine: War on the Steppes focus on hypothetical Great power
conflicts in the 2025 to 2035 timeframes and are intended to help professional military students and
operational staffs understand the relationships between time and distance factors, the rapid tempo of
decision making, risk calculus decisions, the sequencing of operations, determination of objectives,
targeting priorities, and the overall complexities of joint warfighting and all domain operations in the future
operating environment.
Lead Designers: Tim Barrick, Mark Gelston, Curt Hudson, Paul Vebber
Series Rules Editor: James Sterrett
Graphics: Brian Burgess, Greg Mobley, Aaron Martinez, Mark Gelston, Paul Vebber, and Tim Barrick
Supporting Designers: Nate Barrick, Matt Jones, James Sterrett, Mike Dunn, David Redpath, Tom
Flounders, Aaron Johnston, Matt Woodhead, Phil Dupree, Howard Kee, Jim Lacey, Fred Turner, James
Gannon, Mitch Reed, Paul “Kiwi” Jaenichen, Dennis Cremin, Thomas Altman, Ivo de Nooijer, Scott
Chambers, Chris Brinker, Charlotte Lathrop, Jerry Hall
Beta Testers: Sebastian Bae, Christian Palmer, Sean Day, Jim Lacey, Mike Dunn, Don Marrin, James Gannon,
Alfred Turner, Andrew Coutts, Andrew Donohoo, Darren Huxley, John McGarry, Matt Caffrey, Tobin BergenHill, Matt Parks, Thom DeCarlo, James Orr, Matt Bauman, Jake Mender, Jörg Muth, Chris Niedziocha, Nate
Strickland, Mitch Reed, Ben Herbold, Tom Flounders, Mike Gambone, Jim Chartiers, “Tally”, David Woodley,
Corbin Williamson, and multiple faculty and students in seminars at Marine Corps War College, Naval War
College, School of Advanced Warfighting, Marine Corps Command & Staff College, School of Advanced
Military Studies, Air War College, National Defense University, and the MAGTF Staff Training Program.
Vassal Module: Tim Barrick and the Mitre Team: Thom DeCarlo, Tobin Bergen-Hill, Jonathon Byington

Wargame Learning Outcomes
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Understand the relationship between operational time and distance
factors and the tempo of decision making in modern combat.
Command integrated Joint Forces in a dynamic maritime and/or land
campaign spanning the spectrum of conflict.
Appreciate threat capabilities and kill chains and the risks associated with
operating against a highly capable anti-access / area denial (A2AD) threat
in mutually contested spaces.
Appreciate resource considerations in a peer fight to ensure resilience is
built into planning factors.
Understand risk calculus decisions.
Understand the nature of 21st century all domain combined arms
warfare.
Combine battles into campaigns to achieve strategic ends.
47

NOTES:

Operational
Wargame
System

